Genet Program Evolvable Mach (2012) 13:305­337
DOI 10.1007/s10710-012-9159-4

Evolutionary dynamics on multiple scales:
a quantitative analysis of the interplay
between genotype, phenotype, and fitness in linear
genetic programming

Ting Hu · Joshua L. Payne · Wolfgang Banzhaf ·
Jason H. Moore

Received: 15 September 2011 / Revised: 12 March 2012 / Published online: 3 May 2012
Ó Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2012

Abstract Redundancy is a ubiquitous feature of genetic programming (GP), with
many-to-one mappings commonly observed between genotype and phenotype,
and between phenotype and fitness. If a representation is redundant, then neutral
mutations are possible. A mutation is phenotypically-neutral if its application to a
genotype does not lead to a change in phenotype. A mutation is fitness-neutral if its
application to a genotype does not lead to a change in fitness. Whether such neu-
trality has any benefit for GP remains a contentious topic, with reported experi-
mental results supporting both sides of the debate. Most existing studies use
performance statistics, such as success rate or search efficiency, to investigate the
utility of neutrality in GP. Here, we take a different tack and use a measure of
robustness to quantify the neutrality associated with each genotype, phenotype, and
fitness value. We argue that understanding the influence of neutrality on GP requires
an understanding of the distributions of robustness at these three levels, and of the
interplay between robustness, evolvability, and accessibility amongst genotypes,
phenotypes, and fitness values. As a concrete example, we consider a simple linear
genetic programming system that is amenable to exhaustive enumeration and allows
for the full characterization of these quantities, which we then relate to the

Ting Hu and Joshua L. Payne contributed equally to this work.

T. Hu Á J. L. Payne (&) Á J. H. Moore
Computational Genetics Laboratory, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH, USA
e-mail: Joshua.L.Payne@Dartmouth.edu
T. Hu
e-mail: Ting.Hu@Dartmouth.edu
J. H. Moore
e-mail: Jason.H.Moore@Dartmouth.edu

W. Banzhaf
Department of Computer Science, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John's, NL, Canada
e-mail: banzhaf@mun.ca

                                                            123
306  Genet Program Evolvable Mach (2012) 13:305­337

dynamical properties of simple mutation-based evolutionary processes. Our results
demonstrate that it is not only the distribution of robustness amongst phenotypes
that affects evolutionary search, but also (1) the distributions of robustness at the
genotypic and fitness levels and (2) the mutational biases that exist amongst
genotypes, phenotypes, and fitness values. Of crucial importance is the relationship
between the robustness of a genotype and its mutational bias toward other
phenotypes.

Keywords Accessibility Á Coreness Á Evolvability Á Genotype-phenotype map Á
Phenotype-fitness map Á Networks Á Neutrality Á Redundancy Á Robustness

1 Introduction

Redundant mappings between genotype and phenotype are common in genetic
programming (GP), where many mutational variants of a genotype yield identical
phenotypes [40]. Redundant mappings between phenotype and fitness are also
common, with multiple phenotypes producing identical fitness values [43].
Redundant mappings allow for neutrality [1]. In the genotype-phenotype map, a
mutation is neutral if its application to a genotype does not lead to a change in
phenotype (referred to as phenotypically-neutral). In the phenotype-fitness map, a
genetic mutation is neutral if it does not affect fitness (referred to as fitness-neutral).
Redundancy and neutrality are thus separate, but related concepts. While neutrality
requires redundancy, redundancy does not guarantee neutrality.

   Based on a parsimonious model of evolutionary dynamics [40], it has been
argued that the potential benefits of redundancy hinge on two distinctions. The first
is whether the genotype-phenotype map is uniformly or non-uniformly redundant. A
mapping is uniformly redundant if each phenotype is represented by the same
number of genotypes and non-uniformly redundant otherwise. The second
distinction is whether the genotype-phenotype map is synonymously or non-
synonymously redundant. A mapping is synonymously redundant if the genotypes
that map to the same phenotype are similar to one another and non-synonymously
redundant otherwise. The results of [40] suggest that a non-uniformly redundant
mapping is only advantageous in an evolutionary search if the optimal phenotype is
overrepresented, while a uniformly redundant mapping offers no advantage.
Further, non-synonymously redundant mappings can frustrate evolutionary search
because they do not allow recombination operators to work properly.

   The neutrality of a redundant mapping, if it exists, can be characterized as a
genotype network (a.k.a. a neutral network). In such networks, vertices represent
genotypes and edges connect genotypes that share the same phenotype and can be
interconverted via single mutational events1 [51]. By partitioning genotype space
into distinct genotype networks, it is possible to provide a more detailed description
of redundant representations, complementing the information provided by the

1 The structure of a genotype network depends upon the type of mutation under consideration. Here, as in
related studies [6, 8, 51], we are concerned with point mutations.

123
Genet Program Evolvable Mach (2012) 13:305­337  307

uniformity- and synonymity-based classification scheme. For example, within a
non-uniformly redundant mapping, the overrepresented phenotype may comprise a
single genotype network or a set of several independent genotype networks. Within
a non-synonymously redundant mapping, the disparate genotypes of a given
phenotype may be connected via a series of phenotypically-neutral point mutations
or they may be completely isolated from one another. Clearly these different
scenarios have implications for evolutionary search.

   In biological systems, genotype networks are often used to describe the
neutrality of redundant mappings in terms of robustness [50]. One of the many
definitions of robustness is resilience to genetic change, which can be measured
using genotype networks. Specifically, the robustness of a genotype is linearly
proportional to the number of connections it possesses in the genotype network.
The robustness of a phenotype can be quantified as the average genotypic
robustness of the genotypes in a genotype network [51] or as the total number of
genotypes in the genotype network [8]. If in the latter case a phenotype is made
up of more than a single genotype network, then the average number of genotypes
per genotype network can be used to measure phenotypic robustness. Fitness
robustness can be measured as the sum of the phenotypic robustness of all
phenotypes that are connected via mutational events that do not yield a change in
fitness.

   Genotype networks provide a general framework for characterizing the neutrality
of a redundant mapping, and have found application in a wide array of systems,
including sulfur metabolism [39], RNA [14, 38, 41], gene regulatory networks [6,
35, 36], and field programmable gate arrays [37]. One of the primary advantages of
discussing neutrality in terms of robustness is that an exact measure of neutrality can
be specifically assigned to each genotype, phenotype, and fitness value [51, 52].
This allows for the assessment of the distributions of robustness, which describe the
frequency with which a given robustness value is observed, at each of these three
levels. Further, it allows for the quantification of the mutational biases that exist
amongst genotypes, phenotypes, and fitness values. For example, the set of
phenotypically-non-neutral mutations associated with a genotype need not be
evenly divided amongst other genotype networks; some mutational transitions may
be more likely than others.

   This last point is of particular importance, as the utility of a redundant
representation in evolutionary search is not only dependent upon the various
distinctions of redundancy [40], but also upon the manner in which genotype space
is partitioned into genotype networks and how this impacts mutational transitions
amongst genotypes, phenotypes, and fitness values. For example, increasing the
number of genotypes that map to a given phenotype will be of limited value if this
increase does not provide mutational opportunities to discover new phenotypes.
Similarly, a genetic overrepresentation of the optimal phenotype will only be
advantageous if there is a corresponding increase in the number of mutational
opportunities to access that phenotype. Genotype networks provide a framework for
the systematic investigation of such mutational opportunities, through the charac-
terization of phenotypically- and fitness-non-neutral genetic mutations, and thus for
the concrete assessment of the potential benefits of neutrality in mutation-based

                                                123
308  Genet Program Evolvable Mach (2012) 13:305­337

evolutionary search. Specifically, both the relationship between robustness and the
ability to discover novel phenotypes, i.e., evolvability, and the relationship between
robustness and the relative ease with which a phenotype is accessed by a mutation-
based evolutionary process, i.e., accessibility, can be described exactly using
genotype networks [8, 47, 51, 52].

   The utility of neutrality in GP is a contentious topic [16]. While some studies
have found no benefit [7, 44, 45], others have claimed that neutrality buffers against
deleterious genetic perturbation [20, 46, 57] and reduces the risk of premature
convergence through an expansion of the search space [12, 18]. However, little
work has been done to explicitly characterize robustness, evolvability, and
accessibility at the genotypic, phenotypic, and fitness levels, nor to describe their
relationships within and between these levels [21]. However, in biological systems
these relationships have been the focus of numerous theoretical [6, 10, 22, 30, 34,
35, 51, 52, 54, 55] and empirical [4, 13, 19, 23] analyses. For example, the enhanced
robustness of rewired bacterial gene networks has been shown to increase cell
viability in novel environments [23]. Similarly, increased robustness in the
cytochrome P450 BM3 protein has been shown to increase the probability that
mutants can hydroxylate novel substrates [4]. These empirical observations can be
explained theoretically by considering robust phenotypes as large genotype
networks, through which a population diffuses neutrally and builds up genetic
diversity [22, 48]. This facilitates access to novel phenotypes through phenotypi-
cally-non-neutral mutations into adjacent genotype networks [51].

   Expanding upon the work of [2], we have recently used genotype networks to
describe the distributions of robustness at the level of the genotype and phenotype in
a simple linear genetic programming (LGP) system used to solve a Boolean search
problem [21]. This LGP system was chosen because it offers several advantages
over alternative GP systems. First, the fixed-length representation is compact; the
set of all genotypes is finite and computationally enumerable. Second, redundancy is
intrinsic to the system; in our implementation, a total of 228 genotypes map to 16
phenotypes, which in turn map to 5 fitness values. Third, there is a clear delineation
between genotype, phenotype, and fitness, allowing for a full description of their
interplay. By capitalizing on recent developments in the characterization of
robustness, evolvability, and accessibility in RNA [8, 52], we provided a
quantitative analysis of the genotype and phenotype spaces in this LGP system.
We then conducted a preliminary exploration of the relationships between
robustness, evolvability, accessibility, and mutation-based search, using a large
ensemble of random walks.

   The primary goal of our previous and current study is to describe the redundancy
of this LGP system and to relate the properties of this redundancy to mutation-based
evolutionary processes. To this end, we address several research questions. For
example, is the redundancy uniform or non-uniform, synonymous or non-
synonymous? Is neutrality present? If so, how is genotype space partitioned?
How is robustness distributed amongst genotypes, phenotypes, and fitness values?
What are the relationships between robustness, evolvability, and accessibility within
and between each of these three levels? How do these properties relate to mutation-
based evolutionary search?

123
Genet Program Evolvable Mach (2012) 13:305­337  309

   Here, we embed our previous results [21] within an extended study, broadening
our analysis in several ways. First, we describe the genotype networks in greater
detail, providing additional topological analyses that clarify some previously
unexplained observations regarding their structure. Second, we expand the scope of
analysis to include robustness, evolvability, and accessibility at the fitness level.
Third, we augment our evolutionary analyses to include random walks (1) that are
constrained to a single genotype network and (2) that only permit mutations that
maintain or improve fitness. Lastly, we use Markov chains to analytically
approximate the duration and trajectory of these evolutionary processes, and we
provide a mechanistic explanation for their occasional failure.

2 Methods

2.1 Linear genetic programming

In the LGP representation, an individual (or program) consists of a set of
L instructions, which are structurally similar to those found in register machine
languages. Each instruction is made up of an operator, a set of operands, and a
return value. In the programs considered in this study, each instruction consisted of
an operator drawn from the set {AND, OR, NAND, NOR}, two Boolean operands, and
one Boolean return value. The inputs, operands, and return values were stored in
registers with varying read/write permissions. Specifically, R0 and R1 were used as
calculation registers that could be read and written, whereas R2 and R3 were used as
input registers that were read-only. In this formulation, a calculation register can
serve in an instruction as an operand or a return, but an input register can only be
used as an operand. An example program with L = 4 is given below.

                                         R1 ¼ R2 OR R3
                                         R0 ¼ R1 AND R2
                                         R1 ¼ R0 NAND R1
                                         R0 ¼ R3 NOR R1

Instructions were executed sequentially from top to bottom. Prior to program exe-
cution, the values of R0 and R1 were initialized to 0. After program execution, the
final value in R0 was returned as output.

2.2 Genotype, phenotype, and fitness space

To facilitate the enumeration of the entire genotype, phenotype, and fitness spaces,
we considered a two-input, one-output Boolean problem instance with L = 4
instructions. This sequence of instructions is referred to as the genotype, xg. Letting
C and I denote the numbers of calculation and input registers, respectively, and O
the cardinality of the operator set, there are a total of (C 9 (C ? I)2 9 O)L
genotypes in the LGP representation. We refer to this set of programs as the
genotype space, Ug. In the system considered here (L = 4, C = 2, I = 2, O = 4),

                                                            123
310        Genet Program Evolvable Mach (2012) 13:305­337

the genotype space comprises jUgj ¼ 228 unique programs and each genotype can

be converted into any one of 40 neighboring genotypes with a single point mutation

to one of its 16 loci.

   These genotypes map to a considerably smaller set of phenotypes, which are

defined by the functional relationship between the input and output registers.
Specifically, the phenotype xp is defined by the set of outputs observed across each

of the four possible combinations of Boolean inputs. Since the outputs are also
Boolean, the phenotype space, Up comprises jUpj ¼ 24 ¼ 16 unique phenotypes.
This genotype-phenotype map wg! 7 p : Ug! 7 Up is thus redundant, because
jUgj [ jUpj [40]. As an example of wg7!p; consider the program provided above,
which yields the following truth table

     R2½x  R3½y  R0

     0     0     0

     0     1     0

     1     0     1

     1     1     0

The phenotype is the 4-bit vector in the rightmost column of the truth table, which
corresponds to the function x AND !y, where ! denotes negation.

   Each of the 16 phenotypes can be assigned a fitness value xf within the fitness
space Uf using a mapping wtpp! 7 f : Up7!Uf that depends upon the prescribed
phenotypic target tp. In this study, wtpp7!fðxpÞ is the Hamming distance between the
phenotype xp and the target tp. We assume fitness minimization. Since the
phenotypes are represented as 4-bit vectors, there are five possible fitness values and
the mapping of phenotype to fitness depends upon which phenotype is chosen as the
target. For example, the phenotype TRUE ði.e., h1111iÞ has a fitness of 4 when the
target phenotype is FALSE ði.e., h0000iÞ, but has an improved fitness of 1 when the
target phenotype is x OR y ði.e., h0111iÞ.

2.3 Genotype, phenotype, and fitness networks

The redundant mapping of genotype to phenotype may generate neutrality. As
mentioned in the Introduction, a convenient formalism for describing the neutrality
of a redundant mapping is a genotype network, in which genotypes are represented
as vertices and edges connect genotypes that can be interconverted via phenotyp-
ically-neutral point mutations2. A genotype network Gxp ¼ ðCxp ; Hxp Þ corresponding

2 Note that a phenotype may comprise multiple, independent genotype networks that cannot be reached
from one another via phenotypically-neutral point mutations. Such collections of genotype networks are
referred to as genotype sets [53]. Since it is known that the phenotypes of this LGP system each comprise
a single genotype network [21], we do not present the mathematical formalisms needed to describe
genotype sets.

123
Genet Program Evolvable Mach (2012) 13:305­337                                                 311

to phenotype xp is formally defined as a set of genotypes Cxp  Ug and a set of edges
Hxp connecting these genotypes; an edge hxg; ygi 2 Hxp if for genotype xg an
application of the mutation operator h : Ug7!Ug yields a different genotype yg of the
same phenotype xp, i.e., h(xg) = yg and wg7!pðxgÞ ¼ wg!7 pðygÞ ¼ xp: In this study,
we are concerned with point mutations, which we define as a single change to an
operand, operator, or return of the instruction set of a program. This point mutation

is phenotypically-neutral if it does not lead to a change in phenotype (Fig. 1).

   Genotype networks corresponding to different phenotypes may be connected to

one another via phenotypically-non-neutral point mutations, in which case they are

referred to as adjacent. Note that there may be many individual points of contact

between adjacent genotype networks, but that each of these points corresponds to a
single point mutation (Fig. 1a). Formally, two genotype networks Gxp and Gyp are
adjacent if there exist some xg 2 Cxp and yg 2 Cyp such that h(xg) = yg. The set of
edges that correspond to phenotypically-non-neutral point mutations between
genotypes in the genotype networks of phenotypes xp and yp is denoted by Xxp;yp . By

considering the adjacency of all genotype networks in the genotype space, we can

construct a phenotype network (Fig. 2). Vertices correspond to phenotypes and are
weighted according to the number of genotypes in their underlying genotype

network, and edges correspond to the adjacency of genotype networks and are

weighted according to the number of phenotypically-non-neutral point mutations

between genotype networks. Vertices may also be assigned a fitness value, which

corresponds to the phenotype's Hamming distance from a pre-specified phenotypic
target tp. Thus, we can formally define a phenotype network in three ways,

depending upon whether phenotypes are assigned fitness values, and if so, whether

deleterious mutations are allowed.

                                                R 0 = R 3 AND R 1

                                                R 1 = R 0 AND R 3

a  b                                            R 0 = R 1 OR R 3
                                                R 0 = R 3 AND R 0

                                                y

                                                   phenotypically-
                                                    non-neutral

   R 0 = R 3 AND R 1                            R 0 = R 3 AND R 1   R 0 = R 3 AND R 1

   R 0 = R 0 AND R 3 phenotypically- R 1 = R 0 AND R 3 phenotypically- R 1 = R 0 AND R 3

   R 0 = R 1 OR R 2 neutral                     R 0 = R 1 OR R 2 non-neutral R 0 = R 1 OR R 2

   R 0 = R 3 AND R 0                            R 0 = R 3 AND R 0   R 0 = R 3 NOR R 0

   x AND y                                      x AND y             x NOR y

Fig. 1 a Schematic diagram of a subset of genotype space in linear genetic programming. Vertices
correspond to genotypes, their color to phenotypes, and edges connect genotypes that can be
interconverted via point mutations. b Point mutations (highlighted in gray) correspond to a single change
in the instruction set and can be phenotypically-neutral or phenotypically-non-neutral, depending on
whether the phenotype is preserved. For visual clarity, we only depict a small subset of the 40 potential
point mutations to the 16 loci of each genotype

                                                            123
312  Genet Program Evolvable Mach (2012) 13:305­337

Fig. 2 Schematic diagram of the redundant mapping between genotype, phenotype, and fitness networks.
The dashed vertical lines show that multiple vertices at a lower level can be mapped to a single vertex at a
higher level. The thickness of the solid lines indicates the number of possible mutational transitions
between vertices. Each vertex corresponds uniquely to a single genotype, phenotype, or fitness value

1. In the first case, phenotypes are not assigned fitness values. The phenotype
     network P ¼ ðUp; !Þ comprises the set of all phenotypes Up and a set of
     undirected edges ! connecting phenotypes; an edge hxp; ypi 2 ! if jXxp;yp j [ 0.
     The weight of each phenotype xp 2 Up is jCxpj. The weight of each edge
     hxp; ypi 2 ! is jXxp;yp j.

2. In the second case, phenotypes are assigned fitness values and deleterious
     mutations are allowed. The phenotype network is therefore identical to the
     previous case, save the fact that each phenotype now corresponds to a particular
     fitness value, which is determined by the phenotype-to-fitness mapping wtpp!7 f.

3. In the third case, phenotypes are assigned fitness values, but deleterious
     mutations are not allowed. This corresponds to a ``replace if better or equal''
     selection strategy [9, 24]. The phenotype network is therefore modified Ptp ¼
     ðUp; !tp Þ such that it depends upon the target. The set of edges !tp are now
     directed; an edge hxp; ypi 2 !tp points from phenotype xp to phenotype yp if
     jXxp;yp j [ 0 and wptp! 7 f ðxpÞ [ wptp! 7 f ðypÞ.

   The mapping from phenotype to fitness wtpp! 7 f is also redundant, with several
phenotypes yielding the same fitness value. This redundancy may yield an addi-
tional layer of neutrality. By considering the connectivity of phenotypes with differ-
ent fitness values, we can construct a fitness network (Fig. 2), where each vertex
corresponds to a single fitness value and is weighted according to the sum of the
sizes of the underlying phenotypes' genotype networks. Edges correspond to the adja-
cency of fitness values and are weighted according to the number of fitness-non-neutral

123
Genet Program Evolvable Mach (2012) 13:305­337                                                         313

point mutations between the genotype networks of the phenotypes that make up
each fitness value. Fitness networks can be formally defined in two ways, depending
upon whether deleterious mutations are allowed.

1. In the first case, deleterious mutations are allowed. The fitness network Ftp ¼
     ðUf; Dtp Þ corresponding to the phenotypic target tp comprises the set of all
     fitness values Uf and a set of undirected edges Dtp connecting fitness values; an
     edge hxf; yfi 2 Dtp exists between fitness value xf and fitness value yf if 9xg; yg 2
     Ug such that h(xg) = yg and wptp7!f ðwg! 7 pðxgÞÞ ¼ xf and wtpp!7 fðwg7!pðygÞÞ ¼ yf .

2. In the second case, deleterious mutations are not allowed. This leads to a

     modification of the fitness network such that the set of edges are directed.
     Formally, an edge hxf; yfi 2 Dtp points from fitness value xf to fitness value
     yf if 9xg; yg 2 Ug such that h(xg) = yg and wptp7!fðwg7!pðxgÞÞ ¼ xf and
     wptp!7 f ðwg7!pðygÞÞ ¼ yf and xf [ yf.

    In both cases, the set of edges between the genotype networks of the phenotypes

with fitness values xf and yf is denoted by Xxf;yf . The weight of each fitness value
               P
xf  2  Uf  is                             jCxp  j.  The  weight  of  each  edge  hxf; yfi  2  Dtp  is  jXxf;yf j.
                   fxpjwptp7!f ðxpÞ¼xf g

2.4 Observable quantities

To characterize the genotypic, phenotypic, and fitness spaces of this LGP system,
we consider the topological measures defined below. In addition to describing how
these quantities relate to one another, both within and between levels, we will also
consider their relationship with simple, mutation-based evolutionary processes.

2.4.1 Robustness

We use robustness to quantify the degree of neutrality associated with each

genotype, phenotype, and fitness value. Specifically, we define genotypic robustness
Rg as [52]

                                                    RgðxgÞ ¼ kxg =40;                                  ð1Þ

where kxg is the number of connections genotype xg possesses in the genotype
network and 40 is the total number of possible point mutations. Genotypic
robustness is thus the fraction of the total number of possible point mutations to a
given genotype that are phenotypically-neutral. We define phenotypic robustness Rp
as the number of genotypes in the phenotype's underlying genotype network,

                                                    RpðxpÞ ¼ jCxp j:                                   ð2Þ

This is the number of genotypes that yield the same phenotype and that are con-

nected via a series of phenotypically-neutral point mutations. We define fitness
robustness Rf as the sum of the phenotypic robustnesses of all phenotypes with a

given fitness value,

                                                                                                   123
314                                   Genet Program Evolvable Mach (2012) 13:305­337

2.4.2 Evolvability  RfðxfÞ ¼      X                        RpðxpÞ:           ð3Þ

                                  fxpjwptp! 7 f ðxpÞ¼xf g

Several definitions of evolvability have been put forth [26, 52, 54]. Here, we focus

on those definitions that can be expressed in terms of the properties of genotype
networks. We define genotypic evolvability Eg of a genotype xg with phenotype xp

as the proportion of the total number of possible phenotypes that can be reached via

individual, phenotypically-non-neutral point mutations to genotype xg (i.e., all

genotypes that are of edit distance 1 from xg) [52]
     EgðxgÞ ¼ fypjhðxgÞ ¼ yg; wg! 7 pðygÞ ¼ yp; xp 6¼ ypg=15
                                                                             ð4Þ

For phenotypic evolvability, we consider two measures. The first measure, Ep1, is
simply the proportion of the total number of possible phenotypes that are adjacent to
a given phenotype (i.e., via phenotypically-non-neutral point mutations to geno-
types in the underlying genotype network) [52],

                                  E1pðxpÞ ¼ kxp =15                          ð5Þ

where kxp is the number of edges emanating from phenotype xp in the phenotype

network. In Eqs. (4) and (5), the denominator is the total number of possible
adjacent phenotypes. The second measure, E2p, provides a more nuanced analysis of

the potential to mutate from one phenotype to another [8]. Letting

                     ( P ; p
                    f ¼ xpyp
                                  jXxp;yp j            if xp ¼6 yp           ð6Þ
                                      jXxp;zp j
                                                       if xp ¼ yp
                                  z¼6 y

                                  0;

denote the proportion of phenotypically-non-neutral point mutations to genotypes of

phenotype xp that result in genotypes of phenotype yp, we define the evolvability Ep2
of phenotype xp as

                               (                           if fxppyp ¼ 08yp
                                                             otherwise.
                    E2pðxpÞ ¼     1 À P0yp;ðfxppyp Þ2                        ð7Þ

This corresponds to the probability that two randomly chosen phenotypically-non-
neutral point mutations to genotypes of phenotype xp result in genotypes with distinct
phenotypes. Thus, this measure takes on a value of zero if phenotype xp can only

mutate into one other phenotype. More generally, this measure takes on low values

when a phenotype is adjacent to only a few other phenotypes and its phenotypically-

non-neutral mutations are biased toward a subset of these phenotypes. It takes on

high values when a phenotype is adjacent to many other phenotypes and its phe-

notypically-non-neutral mutations are uniformly divided amongst these phenotypes.

   These two measures can be adapted to measure fitness evolvability. The first
measure Ef1 corresponds to the proportion of all fitness values possibly adjacent to
fitness value xf

123
Genet Program Evolvable Mach (2012) 13:305­337                                                                            315

                                           E1f ðxfÞ ¼ kxf =4;                                                             ð8Þ

where kxf is the number of connections emanating from fitness value xf in the fitness

network and 4 is the total number of possible adjacent fitness values. The second

measure uses

                                        8
                                        < jXxf ;yf j
                      P ; f                                          if xf¼6 yf
                     f ¼ : xfyf                                      if xf ¼ yf
                                                    jXxf ;zf j                                                            ð9Þ

                                                z¼6 y

                                                   0;

to measure fitness evolvability Ef2 as
                                     (
                                                0;                   if fxffyf ¼ 08yf
                     E2f ðxf Þ ¼              P                       otherwise.                                          ð10Þ
                                        1  À          ðfxff      Þ2
                                                  yf         yf

2.4.3 Accessibility

In addition to measuring phenotypic evolvability Ep2, which describes the uniformity
of phenotypically-non-neutral mutations emanating from phenotype xp, we also

measure phenotypic accessibility [8],                  X

                                        ApðxpÞ ¼                 fyppxp ;                                                 ð11Þ

                                                             yp

which represents the propensity to mutate into phenotype xp. This measure takes on

high values if a phenotype is relatively easy to access from other phenotypes, and
low values otherwise3. For an alternative formulation of this quantity see [27, 28].

The analogous definition of fitness accessibility is
                                                       X
                                        AfðxfÞ ¼                 fyff xf ;                                                ð12Þ

                                                             yf

which represents the propensity to mutate into fitness value xf. Note that when
deleterious mutations are not allowed, the worst fitness value has Af(xf = 4) = 0.

2.4.4 Distance and diversity

The distance between two genotypes xg and yg is calculated as

                     Dðxg;                 ygÞ  ¼  1   X 16      dðxgi ;    ygi Þ;                                        ð13Þ
                                                   16
                                                       i¼1

where d(xig,ygi ) = 1 if genotypes xg and yg differ at location i and d(xgi ,ygi ) = 0
otherwise. The summation is taken across all 16 loci and then normalized.

3 Note that genotypic accessibility is not a useful concept. This is because it is equivalent to the total

number of possible point mutations   to a genotype. Specifically,           Pif ywg efygguxsge¼d  fxggyg to  denote  the  fraction  of
point mutations to genotype xg that  result in genotype yg, then                                  408xg      2 Ug.

                                                                                                                     123
316             Genet Program Evolvable Mach (2012) 13:305­337

   The diversity of the sets of phenotypes Kxg and Kyg that are accessible within the
1-neighborhood of two genotypes xg and yg of the same phenotype xp is calculated

as [6]

                FðKxg ; Kyg Þ ¼ jfKxg \ Kyg gj=15;  ð14Þ

where fÃg denotes set complement. The denominator reflects the extreme case
where one genotype can access all of the 15 possibly adjacent phenotypes and the
other can access none ðe.g:; Kxg ¼ Up n fxpg; Kyg ¼ ;Þ. If F is small, the two
genotypes are adjacent to similar sets of genotype networks. If F is large, the two
genotypes have mutational access to diverse sets of genotype networks.

2.4.5 Coreness

The genotype networks considered in this study are too large to visualize directly.
However, we can gain further insight into their structure by describing the
distributions of certain vertex-level properties. One such property is vertex degree,
which we use to calculate genotypic robustness. Another property is coreness,
which is an integer index k that defines the position of a vertex as belonging to one
of several non-overlapping k-shells [33]. Each k-shell is defined as a subset of
vertices in which each vertex is connected to at least k other vertices. Thus, vertices
with large k are close to the innermost core of the network, and vertices with small k
are nearer the periphery.

3 Results

3.1 Statistical characteristics of genotype, phenotype, and fitness spaces

To investigate the genotype, phenotype, and fitness spaces of the two-input, one
output LGP system of L = 4 instructions, we exhaustively enumerated all 228
genotypes, which allowed for a full characterization of their mutational connec-
tivities. We present our analysis of these spaces incrementally, beginning at the
level of the genotype and ending with a description of the interplay between
genotype, phenotype, and fitness. We use the measures provided in Sect. 2.4 to
describe these spaces and we often illustrate the relationships between these
quantities using correlations, which we summarize with Pearson's correlation
coefficient and a standard permutation test of statistical significance.

   Our goal is to use these measures to address the following research questions,
among others. What is the relationship between evolvability and robustness at the
genotypic level? Is this relationship different at the phenotypic or fitness levels? Are
genotype networks confined to specific regions of genotype space or do they extend
throughout its entirety? Does the location of a genotype on a genotype network
impact the set of phenotypes it can access via phenotypically-non-neutral mutation?
How does the choice of phenotypic target impact the structure of the phenotype
network and fitness network?

123
Genet Program Evolvable Mach (2012) 13:305­337  317

3.1.1 Genotype space

Genotype space was partitioned into 16 independent genotype networks. These
genotype networks ranged in size from a minimum of 24,832 genotypes to a
maximum of 60,393,728 genotypes (ranging in size from (1 % to 23 % of
genotype space, respectively).

   In Fig. 3, we depict several properties of the genotype network that corresponds
to the representative phenotype !x AND y. In this particular genotype network, as
well as all others in this LGP system, the distribution of genotypic evolvability is
unimodal (Fig. 3a), while the distribution of genotypic robustness is bimodal
(Fig. 3b). These quantities exhibit a slight, but highly significant, inverse
relationship, such that genotypes of greater robustness are generally less evolvable
(R2 = 0.01, p ( 0.01, Fig. 3c).

   The coreness of a genotype is shown as a function of its robustness in Fig. 3d.
The data are positively correlated (R2 = 0.79, p ( 0.01) and fall into two discrete
clusters, suggesting that the genotype network consists of a single dense core of
highly robust genotypes and a periphery of less robust genotypes. The clear
delineation of the two clusters explains the bimodality in the distribution of
genotypic robustness (Fig. 3b).

   Figure 3e shows the distribution of genotypic distance between randomly
sampled genotypes in this genotype network. The distribution is unimodal, with an
average distance that falls within one standard deviation of the mean of the
corresponding null distribution (vertical dashed lines). This indicates that the
genotype network is not restricted to a specific region of genotype space, but instead
extends broadly into distant regions of genotype space. The average genotypic
distance grows logarithmically from a minimum of 0.62 to a maximum of 0.68 as
the size of the genotype network increases (Fig. 3e, inset, R2 = 0.91, p ( 0.01), but
never falls outside the bounds of the null distribution.

   To assess the implications of such expansive genotype networks, we calculated
the diversity of the genotype networks adjacent to each randomly chosen pair of
genotypes. The diversity of adjacent genotype networks is shown as a function of
genotypic distance in Fig. 3f. In general, the diversity of adjacent genotype
networks increases as the distance between two genotypes increases (the non-
monotonicity of the trend is attributable to undersampling at the tails of the
distribution, cf., Fig. 3e). This indicates that a genotype's position in genotype
space has a strong influence on the genotype networks that surround it.

3.1.2 Phenotype space

Each of the 16 genotype networks in this system correspond uniquely to a single
phenotype. As such, any two genotypes that yield the same phenotype are connected
through a series of phenotypically-neutral point mutations. The phenotype network
of the mutational transitions between these 16 genotype networks is depicted in
Fig. 4. The network is fully connected, such that any phenotype can be reached
directly from any other. However, the number of phenotypically-non-neutral point
mutations between phenotypes, depicted by edge width, is heterogeneous. Some

                                                123
318     Genet Program Evolvable Mach (2012) 13:305­337

     a  b

     c  d

     e  f

Fig. 3 Properties of genotypes within the phenotype !x AND y. Distributions of a genotypic evolvability
Eg and b genotypic robustness Rg for all &4 million genotypes. c Genotypic evolvability Eg as a function
of genotypic robustness Rg. The solid line represents the best linear fit to the data and is provided as a
guide for the eye. (d) Coreness k as a function of genotypic robustness Rg. Data are linearly binned, with
darker bin shades indicating higher frequency. Note the clear delineation between genotypes with
coreness k B 18 and k [ 18 (dashed horizontal line). This arbitrary distinction is used to color the bars in
b, indicating that highly robust genotypes reside in the core of the genotype network. e Distribution of the
genotypic distance D between 200,000 randomly sampled pairs of genotypes. The dashed vertical lines
represent one standard deviation from the mean of the corresponding null distribution, which was
determined by sampling pairs of genotypes at random from the entire genotype space (i.e., without regard
to phenotype) and calculating the genotypic distance between these pairs. The inset depicts the mean
genotypic distance for all 16 genotype networks as a function of their size. The solid line represents the
best logarithmic fit to the data and is provided as a guide for the eye. (f) The diversity of adjacent
genotype networks F is shown as a function of genotypic distance D

123
Genet Program Evolvable Mach (2012) 13:305­337  319

Fig. 4 Phenotype network for linear genetic programming with two inputs, one output, and four
instructions. Each vertex comprises a genotype network, as depicted schematically in Fig. 1, and thus
vertex size corresponds to phenotypic robustness. Edge width denotes the number of phenotypically-non-
neutral point mutations between two phenotypes, and is normalized by the total number of
phenotypically-non-neutral point mutations between all pairs of phenotypes. Phenotypes are labeled
according to their functional relationship between input and output, where x and y denote the inputs
stored in registers R2 and R3; respectively

phenotypes are mutationally biased toward a small subset of phenotypes
(e.g., Fig. 4, x AND y), while others mutate nearly uniformly to all other phenotypes
(e.g., Fig. 4, x ¼¼ y). Note that the edges are undirected, because in the absence of
fitness there are no deleterious mutations. All mutational events between phenotypes
are reversible and therefore symmetric. Phenotypic robustness is denoted by vertex
size, and the variety of vertex sizes mirrors the heterogeneous distribution of the
sizes of the underlying genotype networks. Note that the phenotype FALSE is larger
than the phenotype TRUE, despite the inherent symmetry of this LGP system. This
occurs because the output register R0 is initialized to 0. Therefore, if a program does
not modify its output register, its default phenotype is FALSE.

   The means of the distributions of genotypic evolvability and robustness vary as a
function of phenotypic robustness (Fig. 5a, b). Specifically, average genotypic
evolvability decreases logarithmically as a function of phenotypic robustness
(Fig. 5a, R2 = 0.95, p ( 0.01). This intuitive observation implies that within robust
phenotypes, most mutations are phenotypically-neutral and do not allow access to
adjacent phenotypes. It follows that the individual genotypes that make up robust

                                                            123
320     Genet Program Evolvable Mach (2012) 13:305­337

     a  b

     c  d

Fig. 5 Properties of phenotype space and their relation to genotype space. Average genotypic
a evolvability E^g and b robustness R^g and phenotypic, c evolvability E1p, E2p and d accessibility Ap as a
function of phenotypic robustness Rp. The data in (a, b) correspond to the average of all genotypes within
a given phenotype and error bars denote their standard deviation. The solid lines correspond to the best (a,
b) logarithmic, c piecewise logarithmic, and d power-law fit to the data, and are provided as a guide for
the eye

phenotypes are collectively more robust. Indeed, we observe that the average
genotypic robustness increases logarithmically as a function of phenotypic
robustness (Fig. 5b, R2 = 0.98, p ( 0.01).

   The relationship between phenotypic evolvability and phenotypic robustness is
less intuitive. Because the phenotype network is fully connected, all phenotypes are
equally and maximally evolvable according to Ep2 (filled circles, Fig. 5c). In
contrast, when mutational biases are taken into account with E2p, phenotypic
evolvability exhibits a nonlinear relationship with phenotypic robustness (open
circles, Fig. 5c). Phenotypic evolvability is lowest for phenotypes of intermedi-
ate robustness ðxAND!y; !xANDyÞ, and then increases logarithmically with
increasing phenotypic robustness (R2 = 0.87, p = 0.02). The relationship is made
non-monotonic by the high evolvability of the least robust phenotypes
ðx XOR y; x ¼¼ yÞ.

   Phenotypic accessibility increases monotonically as a function of phenotypic
robustness, following the power-law Ap µ (Rp)1/2 (Fig. 5d, R2 = 0.99, p ( 0.01).
This implies that random mutations are more likely to lead to robust than to non-
robust phenotypes. Taken together, these results suggest that the most robust
phenotypes are both easy to find (Fig. 5d) and highly evolvable (Fig. 5c), with the

123
Genet Program Evolvable Mach (2012) 13:305­337     321

exception of the least robust phenotypes, which are simultaneously the least
accessible and the most evolvable of any of the phenotypes in this system.

3.1.3 Fitness space

Due to the inherent symmetry of certain pairs of phenotypes (e.g:; x AND !y and
!x AND y), there are 11 unique mappings of phenotype to fitness. Further, the fitness
networks can be constructed under two different assumptions regarding deleterious
mutations. This results in a total of 22 distinct fitness networks.

   We first consider the case where deleterious mutations are allowed. In Fig. 6a, b
we depict two fitness networks, for the phenotypic targets TRUE and x ¼¼ y,
respectively. The distributions of fitness robustness (vertex size) and the number of
fitness-non-neutral mutations (edge width) are heterogeneous and vary between the
11 fitness networks. The set of phenotypes that make up each fitness value also
varies depending on the phenotypic target (e.g., compare vertices of the same shade

a                                               b

c                                               d

Fig. 6 Fitness networks for the phenotypic targets a TRUE and b x ¼¼ y, when deleterious mutations
are allowed. Each vertex represents a fitness value. Vertex annotation reflects all of the phenotypes within
each fitness value and vertex size corresponds to fitness robustness. Vertex color is used to depict the
fitness value, which shifts from black to white as the fitness value improves. The width of the undirected
edges between two vertices corresponds to the number of fitness-non-neutral point mutations, normalized
by the total number of fitness-non-neutral point mutations between all fitness values. Phenotype networks
for the phenotypic targets c TRUE and d x ¼¼ y. Vertex color is the same as a, b. Vertex annotation,
size, and edge width are as in Fig. 4

                                                            123
322     Genet Program Evolvable Mach (2012) 13:305­337

between Fig. 6a, b), but the number of phenotypes per fitness value always remains
the same.

   The structure of the underlying phenotype network (Fig. 6c, d) is identical to that
of Fig. 4, except that each phenotype now possesses a fitness value, which varies
depending upon the phenotypic target (e.g., compare Fig. 6c, d). The relationship
between the robustness, evolvability, and accessibility of a phenotype therefore does
not vary between phenotypic targets.

   Considering all 11 phenotypic targets simultaneously, the means of the
distributions of phenotypic robustness within each fitness value are positively
correlated with fitness robustness (data not shown; R2 = 0.85, p ( 0.01), as are the
means of the distributions of phenotypic accessibility (data not shown; R2 = 0.81, p
( 0.01). The means of the distributions of phenotypic evolvability E^2p exhibit a
nonlinear relationship with fitness robustness (data not shown), akin to the trend
depicted in Fig. 5c. Robustness, accessibility, and evolvability each therefore
exhibit functional relationships between the phenotypic and fitness levels.

   At the level of the fitness network, the correlation between fitness evolvability
and fitness robustness is weak (R2 = 0.06, p = 0.03; Fig. 7a). However, fitness
accessibility exhibits a strong positive correlation with fitness robustness (Fig. 7b),
again increasing according to the power-law Af µ (Rf)1/2 (R2 = 0.90, p ( 0.01).
Thus, the most robust fitness values are also the most accessible, an intuitive result
given the positive correlation between fitness robustness and average phenotypic
accessibility.

   Next, we consider the case where deleterious mutations are not allowed. In
Fig. 8a, b we again depict the fitness networks for the phenotypic targets TRUE and
x ¼¼ y, respectively. The sets of phenotypes that make up each fitness value are the
same as in Fig. 6a, b. However, the edges are now directed and the fitness networks
are weakly connected. This implies that a directed path may not exist between two
vertices, reflecting the fact that mutational transitions between phenotypes are only
permitted if those transitions are beneficial or fitness-neutral.

     a  b

Fig. 7 Properties of fitness space when deleterious mutations are allowed. Fitness a evolvability E2f and
b accessibility Af as a function of fitness robustness Rf. The solid lines correspond to the best
a logarithmic fit to the data and b the power-law Af µ (Rf)1/2. Both are provided as a guide for the eye

123
Genet Program Evolvable Mach (2012) 13:305­337     323

a                                               b

c                                               d

Fig. 8 Fitness networks for the phenotypic targets a TRUE and b x ¼¼ y, when deleterious mutations
are not allowed. Vertex color, size, and annotation are as in Fig. 6a, b. The width of the directed edges
between two vertices corresponds to the number of fitness-non-neutral point mutations, normalized by the
total number of fitness-non-neutral point mutations emanating from each fitness value. Note that the worst
fitness value (black vertex) only has edges pointing away from it and the best fitness value (white vertex)
only has edges pointing into it. Phenotype networks for the phenotypic targets c TRUE and d x ¼¼ y.
Vertex color, size, and annotation are as in Fig. 6c, d. The width of the directed edges between two
vertices corresponds to the number of phenotypically-non-neutral point mutations, normalized by the total
number of phenotypically-non-neutral point mutations emanating from each phenotype. Note that edges
only point toward phenotypes of equal or better fitness (same or lighter color)

   Prohibiting deleterious mutations affects the underlying phenotype network
(Fig. 8c, d), leading to several fundamental changes in its structure. First, the
number of phenotypically-non-neutral mutational events between phenotypes is no
longer symmetric; the edges are now directed. Second, the network transforms from
strongly connected to weakly connected, meaning that some phenotypes are left
unreachable from some others. Third, the edge sets vary markedly between the 11
unique phenotype networks (e.g., compare Fig. 8c, d). Therefore, the relationship
between the robustness, evolvability, and accessibility of phenotypes varies between
phenotypic targets.

   Indeed, any correlation that was previously observed between phenotypic
robustness and phenotypic evolvability (Fig. 5c) is now lost, as measured using
either E2p or Ep2 (data not shown; Ep1: 3.1 9 10-5 B R2 B 2.7 9 10-2, p [ 0.55;
Ep2: 1.4 9 10-5 B R2 B 1.7 9 10-1, p [ 0.11, for all 11 phenotype networks).
However, the correlation between phenotypic robustness and phenotypic

                                                            123
324  Genet Program Evolvable Mach (2012) 13:305­337

accessibility remains both positive and significant (data not shown;
0.48 B R2 B 0.75, p ( 0.01 for all 11 phenotype networks). Thus, in the absence
of deleterious mutations, the most robust phenotypes generally remain the easiest to
find, but are no longer the most evolvable.

   Since the prohibition of deleterious mutations does not impact phenotypic
robustness, the correlation between fitness robustness and the means of the
distributions of phenotypic robustness within each fitness value is identical to the
previous case where deleterious mutations were allowed (data not shown;
R2 = 0.85, p ( 0.01). However, prohibiting deleterious mutations does impact
phenotypic evolvability and phenotypic accessibility. Specifically, the correlation
between fitness robustness and the means of the distributions of phenotypic
accessibility is lost (data not shown; R2 = 0.09, p = 0.02), as is the correlation
between fitness robustness and the means of the distributions of phenotypic
evolvability E"2p (data not shown; R2 = 0.07, p = 0.01).

   At the level of the fitness network, there is no correlation between fitness
evolvability and fitness robustness (data not shown; E1f : R2 = 0, p =
1.00; Ef2: R2 = 1.8 9 10-4, p = 0.91) nor between fitness accessibility and fitness
robustness (data not shown; R2 = 2.3 9 10-3, p = 0.71). The robustness of a
fitness value therefore does not affect the ease with which it is identified, an
observation that stems from the lack of correlation between fitness robustness and
the average accessibility of the phenotypes that make up a fitness value.

3.2 Random walks and hill climbing

To understand how the structure of genotype, phenotype, and fitness networks
influence evolutionary search, we conduct four interrelated analyses. Each is a
highly stylized abstraction of an evolutionary process, in which we consider the
behavior of only a single individual, which is subject to mutation. These analyses
are also introduced incrementally. We begin with random walks that explore a
single genotype network, and end with a hill climber that concurrently traverses
genotype, phenotype, and fitness space.

   Our goal is to relate the dynamical properties of mutation-based search with the
structural properties of genotype, phenotype, and fitness networks presented in Sect.
3.1. We address the following questions, among others: How does the robustness of
a genotype influence the frequency with which a random walk encounters that
genotype? Is the waiting time of a random walk to reach a target phenotype
correlated with the evolvability of the phenotype in which the walk began? Can we
predict waiting times using Markov chains?

3.2.1 Random walks through genotype space

In our first analysis, we consider a random walk in the genotype network of the
representative phenotype !x AND y. Each step in the random walk corresponds to a
single point mutation. We record the robustness of the genotype encountered in each
step, and use this to calculate the visit frequency, which is the distribution of the

123
Genet Program Evolvable Mach (2012) 13:305­337  325

a

b

Fig. 9 A random walk in the genotype network of phenotype !x AND y. a Visit frequency, defined as the
proportion of steps in a random walk that are spent at a genotype of a given robustness. The bin centers
are the same as in Fig. 3b. b Visit frequency normalized by the frequency with which a given genotypic
robustness value is observed in the genotype network (i.e., the distribution in a divided by the distribution
in Fig. 3b). The horizontal dashed line indicates a visit frequency that is exactly proportional to the
frequency with which a given genotypic robustness value is observed in the genotype network

proportion of steps spent at each genotypic robustness value. To ensure sufficient
sampling, the number of steps in the random walk is set to the number of genotypes
in the genotype network (&4 million).

   The visit frequency is depicted in Fig. 9a. The distribution is bimodal, akin to the
distribution of genotypic robustness presented in Fig. 3b. However, dividing the
former distribution (Fig. 9a) by the latter (Fig. 3b) reveals that the two distributions
are in fact distinct (Fig. 9b). Genotypes are not visited uniformly, but rather in
proportion to their robustness. Thus, genotypes of high robustness are visited more
often, and genotypes of low robustness less often, than would be expected in a
random sampling of genotypes from the genotype network. This comes with the
caveat that low-evolvability genotypes are visited more often than high-evolvability
genotypes (Fig. 3c).

3.2.2 Random walks through genotype and phenotype space

In our second analysis, we consider all of the 16 interconnected genotype networks,
using random walks to explore both genotype and phenotype space.

   For each of the 16 9 15 possible combinations of pairs of unique phenotypes, we
designate one phenotype as a source and the other as a target. We then perform
1,000 random walks, starting from a randomly chosen genotype in the source
phenotype and ending when the random walk reaches any genotype in the target
phenotype. We record the average number of steps required to get from one
phenotype to another, which we refer to as the mean waiting time, TW.

                                                            123
326     Genet Program Evolvable Mach (2012) 13:305­337

   In Fig. 10, we depict the mean waiting time of a random walk as a function of the
source phenotype's evolvability (Fig. 10a) and the target phenotype's accessibility
(Fig. 10b). The mean waiting time is independent of the evolvability of the source
phenotype (R2 = 0.001, p = 0.62), due to the Markovian nature of the random
walk. However, it is strongly correlated with the accessibility of the target
phenotype (R2 = 0.99, p( 0.01). Specifically, the mean waiting time decreases as a
function of target accessibility according to the power-law TW µ (Ap)-5/3. Thus,
accessible phenotypes are found more rapidly by random mutation than less
accessible phenotypes. As highly accessible phenotypes are also highly robust
(Fig. 5d), random mutation leads to robust phenotypes. We note that the waiting
time for random search to identify a target phenotype is inversely proportional to the
phenotypic robustness of the target.

   The Markovian nature of the random walk suggests that an analytical
determination of the expected waiting time between source and target phenotypes
may be possible (``Appendix 1: Markov chains to determine the mean first passage
time'') [17]. In brief, the analytical treatment uses the phenotype network (Fig. 4) as
the transition matrix of a Markov chain, and designates the target phenotype as an
absorbing state. After some algebraic rearrangement and a single matrix inversion,
the waiting time is easily calculated. A fundamental assumption of this analysis is
that the phenotype network accurately encodes the mutational transitions between
phenotypes, despite the fact that the actual mutational transitions are occurring at
the level of genotypes.

   The analytically determined and empirically observed waiting times are strongly
correlated (data not shown; R2 = 0.99, p( 0.001). However, the average residual
between analysis and observation is 126 steps, which constitutes approximately 15 %
of the empirically observed waiting time. Such a large discrepancy suggests that
the phenotype network does not actually provide an accurate description of the
mutational transitions between phenotypes, as will be revealed in the subsequent
section.

     a  b

Fig. 10 Random walks in genotype and phenotype space. Mean waiting time TW as a function of a the
source phenotype's evolvability Ep2 and b the target phenotype's accessibility Ap. The solid lines
correspond to the best a exponential and b power-law fit to the data, and are provided as a guide for the
eye

123
Genet Program Evolvable Mach (2012) 13:305­337                      327

3.2.3 Random walks through genotype, phenotype, and fitness space

In our third analysis, we consider the case where each phenotype is assigned a
fitness value and deleterious mutations are allowed. We therefore use the same
random walk data as in Sect. 3.2.2 to explore the relationships between the
properties of fitness values and the number of steps required to get from a source
phenotype to a target phenotype.

   We depict the mean waiting time as a function of the source fitness value's
evolvability in Fig. 11a and as a function of the target fitness value's accessibility in
Fig. 11b. The mean waiting time decreases exponentially as the evolvability of the
source fitness value increases (R2 = 0.61, p ( 0.01), in contrast to the analogous
observation made at the level of the phenotype (Fig. 10a). Mean waiting time
decreases according to a power-law as the accessibility of the target fitness value
increases (R2 = 0.94, p ( 0.01). The relationship between mean waiting time and
accessibility can be approximated by the function TW µ (Af)-2.

   Note that since deleterious mutations are allowed, the phenotype networks have
not been structurally modified (cf., Fig. 6c, d). The previously observed relation-
ships between mean waiting time, phenotypic evolvability, and phenotypic
accessibility (Fig. 10) therefore remain intact. Further, the results of the Markov
chain analysis presented in Sect. 3.2.2 are identical to those found in this section.

3.2.4 Hill climbing through genotype, phenotype, and fitness space

In our fourth analysis, we consider the case where each phenotype is assigned a
fitness value, but deleterious mutations are not allowed. We employ an ensemble of
hill climbers that sample potential movements at random, but only accept steps that
maintain or improve fitness. We again investigate each of the 16 9 15 possible
combinations of unique source and target phenotypes. For each combination of
source and target phenotype, we perform 100,000 hill climbing simulations, starting
from a randomly chosen genotype in the source phenotype and ending when the
walk reaches any genotype in the target phenotype. The duration of this trajectory is
referred to as the mean adaptation time, TA.

   We depict the mean adaptation time as a function of the source fitness value's
evolvability in Fig. 11c and as a function of the target fitness value's accessibility in
Fig. 11d. Mean adaptation time and the evolvability of the source fitness value are
uncorrelated (R2 = 0.02, p = 0.31), contrasting with the previous case where
deleterious mutations were allowed. Note that some fitness values have E2f = 0
because they only point to the optimal fitness value (cf., Fig. 8a, b). Mean
adaptation time remains correlated with the accessibility of the target fitness value
(R2 = 0.64, p ( 0.01).

   The directed phenotype networks (e.g., Fig. 8c, d) can be used as transition
matrices in Markov chains to analytically determine the expected adaptation time
between source and target phenotypes (``Appendix 1: Markov chains to determine the
mean first passage time'') [17]. We again find a strong correlation between the
analytical and empirical results (R2 = 0.97, p ( 0.01), but a relatively large
discrepancy in the average residual difference in adaptation time (112 steps). Similar

                                                                    123
328     Genet Program Evolvable Mach (2012) 13:305­337

     a  b

     c  d

Fig. 11 Random walks and hill climbing in genotype, phenotype, and fitness space. a, b Mean waiting
time TW and c, d mean adaptation time TW as a function of a, c the evolvability of the source fitness value
Ef2 and b, d the accessibility of the target fitness value Af, when deleterious mutations are a, b and are not
c, d allowed. The solid lines correspond to the best a, c exponential and b, d power-law fit to the data, and
are provided as a guide for the eye

discrepancies are observed when using a related technique [3] to determine the most
common path between source and target phenotypes (``Appendix 2: Markov chains to
determine the most common path''). Specifically, the predicted most common path
matches the empirically observed most common path in only 54 % of the 16 9 15
combinations of source and target phenotype. In each mismatched case, the length of
the observed most common path is greater than or equal to the length of the predicted
most common path. For example, when the source phenotype is y and the target
phenotype is !x AND y, the predicted most common path is y ! TRUE ! !x AND y.
In contrast, the empirically observed most common path is y ! !y ! TRUE !
!x AND y. This occurs despite the facts that (1) the transition probability encoded in the
phenotype network fy;TRUE ¼ 0:19 exceeds that of fy;!y ¼ 0:185 and (2) the total
probability of the former path exceeds that of the latter.

   To elucidate the cause of this discrepancy, we depict in Fig. 12 the average
proportion of phenotypically-non-neutral mutations from a genotype in phenotype y
to (1) a genotype in phenotype !y and (2) a genotype in phenotype TRUE, as a
function of genotypic robustness. Highly robust genotypes are clearly biased toward
phenotype !y. Since genotypes are visited in proportion to their robustness
(Fig. 9b), a random walk through the genotype network of phenotype y is more

123
Genet Program Evolvable Mach (2012) 13:305­337  329

Fig. 12 Phenotypically-non-neutral mutations are not uniformly distributed amongst genotypes. Average
proportion of phenotypically-non-neutral mutations from phenotype !y to phenotypes !y (circles) and
TRUE (squares), as a function of genotypic robustness Rg. Error bars denote one standard deviation

likely to encounter mutational opportunities to enter phenotype !y than phenotype
TRUE despite the fact that in total there are more mutational opportunities to enter
the latter than the former. Thus, the transition probabilities encoded in the
phenotype network belie the actual mutational biases between genotype networks,
and thus violate the assumption that the transition matrix accurately encodes the
probability with which one phenotype changes to another.

4 Discussion

Through an exhaustive characterization of genotype networks, this study has
described the relationships between robustness, evolvability, and accessibility
within and between the genotypic, phenotypic, and fitness levels of a simple LGP
system.

   At the genotypic level, robustness and evolvability were found to be negatively
correlated (Fig. 3c), echoing previous results regarding RNA landscapes [52]. This
intuitive observation implies that robust genotypes are located far from the
periphery of the genotype network, prohibiting direct mutational access to adjacent
genotype networks. Indeed, k-shell decomposition [33] reveals that highly robust
genotypes are located in the dense, innermost core of the genotype network
(Fig. 3b). This separation of the dense core of highly robust genotypes from the
periphery of less robust genotypes (Fig. 3d) also explains the bimodal distribution
of genotypic robustness. The peripheral component extends broadly throughout
genotype space (Fig. 3e), rendering this representation non-synonymous [40], and
the position of a genotype in this space impacts its adjacency to other genotype
networks (Fig. 3f).

   At the phenotypic level, the distribution of robustness was heterogeneous,
indicating that the inherent redundancy of this LGP encoding is non-uniform [40].
Since every phenotype was made up of exactly one genotype network, as opposed to
several independent genotype networks, each of the many genotypes that mapped to
a given phenotype could be reached via a series of phenotypically-neutral point

                                                            123
330  Genet Program Evolvable Mach (2012) 13:305­337

mutations. The distribution of phenotypically non-neutral point mutations was also
heterogeneous, such that some mutational transitions were more likely than others
(Fig. 4). Similar results have been observed in the redundant mappings of
alternative evolutionary systems [5, 31, 42].

   The mutational transitions between phenotypes varied between the case where
deleterious mutations were allowed and the case where they were not allowed.
Specifically, when deleterious mutations were allowed, the phenotype network was
fully connected, implying that the underlying genotype networks were highly
``intertwined,'' a feature that is thought to increase evolvability [11, 12]. The exact
relationship between robustness and evolvability varied depending on how
evolvability was defined (Fig. 5c). When defined by the total connectivity of a
phenotype in the phenotype network (E1p), evolvability was independent of
robustness; all phenotypes were maximally evolvable (cf., Fig. 4). In contrast,
when mutational biases were taken into account (E2p), the relationship between
evolvability and robustness was nonlinear, with phenotypes of intermediate
robustness exhibiting the lowest evolvabilities. These results contrast with those
made in RNA systems where Ep1 was found to be positively correlated [52], and Ep2
negatively correlated, with robustness [8], providing further evidence that the
relationships between these quantities are system-dependent. However, accessibility
and robustness were positively correlated (Fig. 5d), in line with observations made
in RNA systems and supporting the intuitive notion that phenotypes formed by
many genotypes are easier to access than phenotypes formed by few genotypes.

   When deleterious mutations were not allowed, as is the case in ``replace if better
or equal'' selection strategies [9, 24], the relationship between phenotypic
robustness and phenotypic evolvability was lost, as measured using either Ep1 or
E2p. Since phenotypes of lower fitness could only mutate into phenotypes of equal or
higher fitness, the connectivity of a phenotype in the phenotype network was
arbitrarily determined and there was consequently no relationship between these
evolvability measures and phenotypic robustness. In contrast, the relationship
between phenotypic robustness and phenotypic accessibility remained positive, but
with a diminished strength of correlation.

   At the fitness level, the distribution of robustness varied between phenotypic
targets, as did the mutational connectivities between fitness values (Figs. 6a, b; 8a,
b). When the fitness network was constructed under the assumption that deleterious
mutations were allowed, there was a weak relationship between the robustness and
evolvability of a fitness value (Fig. 7a) due to the distance-based mapping of
phenotype to fitness, which arbitrarily grouped phenotypes into fitness values. In
contrast, there was a positive correlation between fitness accessibility and fitness
robustness (Fig. 7b), again supporting the intuitive notion that what is more
common is easier to identify. When the fitness network was constructed under the
assumption that deleterious mutations were not allowed, these correlations were
completely lost.

   As the resolution of analysis shifted from genotype to phenotype, several
functional relationships were observed between the two levels. For instance, the
means of the distributions of both genotypic robustness and genotypic evolvability
were correlated with phenotypic robustness (Fig. 5a, b). Similarly, as the analysis

123
Genet Program Evolvable Mach (2012) 13:305­337  331

shifted from phenotype to fitness, the means of the distributions of phenotypic
robustness and phenotypic accessibility (Fig. 7b) were correlated with fitness
robustness, so long as deleterious mutations were allowed. While some properties
were thus correlated between levels, others were not. For example, when deleterious
mutations were not allowed, fitness evolvability was independent of robustness at
both the phenotypic and fitness levels, a disconnect that again stems from the
mapping of phenotype to fitness, in two ways. First, prohibiting deleterious
mutations leads to the modification of the phenotype networks so as to only allow
mutational transitions from phenotypes of lower fitness to phenotypes of equal or
higher fitness (Fig. 8c, d). This arbitrarily severed many of the mutational
connections between phenotypes, thus negating any relationship between the
robustness and evolvability of a phenotype. Second, the grouping of phenotypes into
fitness values without regard to their robustness or evolvability precluded any
possibility of a functional relationship between these quantities at the two levels.

   To understand how the distributions of robustness, evolvability, and accessibility
impact the evolutionary dynamics of LGP, we performed a series of four
interrelated analyses. In the first analysis, random walks were used to ascertain
the frequency with which a blind evolutionary search would visit a genotype as a
function of its robustness. We found that this visit frequency was positively
correlated with genotypic robustness (Fig. 9), mirroring classical results for random
walks on complex networks [33] and population diffusions on neutral networks [48, 56].
Thus, even in the absence of any selection pressure, blind mutation tends toward
increased genotypic robustness.

   In the second analysis, we considered an ensemble of random walks between
source and target phenotypes. The mean waiting time of random mutation to reach a
target phenotype was found to be uncorrelated with the evolvability of the source
phenotype (Fig. 10a), a result that calls into question the utility of existing
phenotypic evolvability measures. While these measures provide useful information
concerning the immediate adjacency of phenotypes [52] and their mutational
biases [8], they are too myopic to predict the length of an evolutionary trajectory
from one phenotype to another. Consider, for example, that correlations may exist
between the evolvabilities of adjacent phenotypes, such that high evolvability
phenotypes are mutationally biased toward low evolvability phenotypes. As these
correlations (a.k.a. mixing patterns [32]) are not taken into account, the applicability
of current phenotypic evolvability measures are left severely constrained, at least for
this LGP system. In contrast, the mean waiting time of random mutation to reach a
target phenotype was strongly correlated with the target phenotype's accessibility
(Fig. 10b). This result provides additional support to earlier suggestions that
accessibility is a useful measure for understanding evolutionary dynamics in neutral
search spaces [27, 28].

   In the third analysis, we assigned fitness values to each phenotype and again
considered an ensemble of random walks between source and target phenotypes.
The mean waiting time was correlated with both the evolvability of the source
fitness value and the accessibility of the target fitness value. That there was a strong
correlation between mean waiting time and the evolvability of the source fitness
value, but not of the source phenotype, underscores the point that the predictive

                                                123
332  Genet Program Evolvable Mach (2012) 13:305­337

power of these measures varies between levels and among evolutionary processes.
This point is further supported by the results of our fourth analysis, which was a
slight modification of the third. Specifically, the random walk was constrained to
always maintain or improve fitness, which corresponds to the case where deleterious
mutations are prohibited. In this case, the mean adaptation time was not correlated
with the evolvability of the source fitness value (Fig. 11c), but was correlated with
the accessibility of the target fitness value (Fig. 11d).

5 Conclusions and future work

There has been much debate regarding the benefit of neutrality in GP. As argued
in [16], much of this contention stems from the overly complex problems,
representations, and search algorithms used in these investigations, which make it
difficult to tease apart the effects of neutrality from other confounding factors. In
addition, neutrality is often artificially added to the problem representation and little
attention is paid to how this alters the fitness landscape. We circumvented these
issues by using a compact representation with inherent neutrality, a simple target-
matching problem, and an elementary search algorithm.

   Recent experimentation with a minimal GP system has demonstrated that the
benefits of neutrality are problem-dependent [15]. Our results provide further
support for this hypothesis, as the mean waiting time varied significantly between
target phenotypes. For non-uniformly redundant encodings, as considered herein,
theoretical models suggest that neutrality only offers an advantage if the optimal
phenotype is overrepresented at the genetic level [40]. This prediction is in line with
our observation that the mean waiting time decreases as the accessibility of the
target phenotype increases, since accessibility is positively correlated with
robustness. Our results also extend those of [40] to show that it is not only the
uniformity and synonymity of a redundant representation that affect evolutionary
search, but also (1) the distributions of robustness at the genotypic and fitness levels
and (2) the mutational biases that exist amongst genotypes, phenotypes, and fitness
values. Of particular importance is the relationship between the robustness of a
genotype and its mutational bias toward other genotype networks.

   This study opens the door for several future research directions. First, our
analysis can be extended to both larger LGP systems and alternative GP systems.
For example, recent investigations in grammatical evolution have demonstrated
that the mutational connectivities between phenotypes varies amongst represen-
tations and objective functions [31]. Further quantifying these mutational biases
using the measures discussed herein could shed additional light on this variability
and provide insight into the relationship between robustness, evolvability, and
accessibility in another branch of GP. Expanding to these larger and varied
systems will require the adoption and modification of the approximation
techniques developed for RNA systems [25], as the corresponding genotype
networks will not be amenable to exhaustive enumeration. Second, the phenotypic
evolvability measures used in this study could be revised to take into account the
global structure of a phenotype network, as opposed to only considering the

123
Genet Program Evolvable Mach (2012) 13:305­337  333

immediate adjacency of a phenotype. Measures of vertex centrality [33] may
provide a useful starting point. Third, the simple evolutionary processes
considered in this study can be extended to include population-level processes.
This will provide a better understanding of how the structure of genotype,
phenotype, and fitness networks impacts the evolutionary dynamics of LGP.
Fourth, the role of alternative variation operators, such as recombination, should
be considered. Related work on model gene regulatory circuits has demonstrated
that recombination can lead to an increase in both robustness and evolvability [29].
However, the sheer breadth of the genotype networks observed in this study
implies that this LGP encoding is nonsynonymously redundant, which suggests
that recombination may be disruptive in this search space [40]. Nevertheless,
understanding how recombination impacts robustness, evolvability, and accessi-
bility in LGP is an important challenge and exciting direction for future work.
Lastly, several of the trends revealed in this study may lend themselves to
analytical treatment. For example, it may be possible to analytically derive the
relationship between the accessibility and robustness of a phenotype Ap µ (Rp)1/2.
Earlier analytical results on the convexity of genotype networks [27] may be of
relevance in this endeavor. Another relationship that may prove analytically
tractable is between the waiting time of a random walk and the accessibility of the
target phenotype TW µ (Ap)-5/3. Such analysis could help generalize our results to
other phenotype networks, such as those observed in [49].

   In summary, this study has demonstrated that the relationships between
robustness, evolvability, and accessibility vary amongst the genotypic, phenotypic,
and fitness spaces of LGP, as does the ability of these measures to predict the
dynamical properties of an evolutionary process. While mapping the mutational
connectivities between phenotypes and fitness values may allow for the develop-
ment of predictive analytical techniques, such abstractions never tell the complete
story; so long as they do not encode the mutational biases that exist at the level of
the genotype, their explanatory power will be limited.

Acknowledgments This work was partially supported by NIH grants R01-LM009012, R01-LM010098,
and R01-AI59694. J.L.P. was supported by NIH grant R25-CA134286. W.B. acknowledges support from
NSERC Discovery Grants, under RGPIN 283304-07. The authors would like to thank the three
anonymous reviewers for their scrutiny, Davnah Urbach for her thoughtful comments on earlier versions
of this manuscript, and Bill Langdon for fruitful discussions at Evo* 2011.

Appendices

In the appendix, we lay out the details of our analytical treatment, which is based on
the techniques described in [3, 17]. Both texts provide exceptionally lucid
expositions of absorbing Markov chains and their applications.

Appendix 1: Markov chains to determine the mean first passage time

The mean waiting time and mean adaptation time can be obtained analytically with
absorbing Markov chains [17], using the stochastic transition matrix P whose elements

                                                            123
334                                                  Genet Program Evolvable Mach (2012) 13:305­337

                                8 jXxp;yp j
                                <> P ; jHxp jþ                        if xp ¼6 yp
                                                   z6¼y    jXxp;zp j  if xp ¼ yp                     ð15Þ

                                               jHxp j
                           p ¼ >: P ; xpyp
                                      jHxp jþ              jXxp;zp j
                                                     z6¼y

denote the probability of a transition from phenotype xp to phenotype yp.
   The target phenotype tp is the absorbing state of the Markov chain; all other

phenotypes are transient. The row corresponding to phenotype tp is therefore

modified such that ptptp ¼ 1 and ptpxp ¼ 08xp 6¼ tp. Placing P in canonical form, we

have     0                            10                                         1

         B@BB  p11   p12   ...  p1tp  CACC     BBB@  p11   p12        ...  p1tp  CACC             

P     ¼        p21   p22   ...  p2tp        ¼        p21   p22        ...  p2tp        ¼    Q  R  ;  ð16Þ
                ...   ...  ...   ...                  ...   ...       ...   ...             0  1

               ptp1 ptp2 . . . ptptp                 0 0 ... 1

where Q is a ðjUpj À 1Þ Â ðjUpj À 1Þ matrix, R is a ðjUpj À 1Þ Â 1 column vector,
and 0 is a 1 Â ðjUpj À 1Þ row vector. To obtain the mean waiting time, we use Q to

calculate the fundamental matrix

                                            N ¼ ðI À QÞÀ1;                                           ð17Þ

where I is the identity matrix and entry nxpyp is the expected time spent in transient
phenotype xp, given that the random walk started in the transient phenotype yp. The

fundamental matrix is then used to calculate

                                               s ¼ Ne;                                               ð18Þ

where e is a column vector of ones and sxp is the mean waiting time to reach
phenotype tp from phenotype xp.

Appendix 2: Markov chains to determine the most common path

Absorbing Markov chains can also be used to determine the most common path
from a transient phenotype sp to a target phenotype tp. Since the most common path

must visit each phenotype at most once, the length of the path must be less than or
equal to the total number of phenotypes jUpj. Every path has an associated
probability, which can be calculated using the entries of the transition matrix P. For
example, the path sp ! xp ! yp ! tp has probability pspxp pxpyp pyptp . The most

common path is the one with the highest such joint probability, which can be

determined efficiently using the message passing approach described in [3].

References

 1. W. Banzhaf, in Proceedings of Parallel Problem Solving from Nature III. Genotype-phenotype
     mapping and neutral variation--a case study in genetic programming. Lecture Notes in Computer
     Science, vol. 866 (1994) pp. 322­332

123
Genet Program Evolvable Mach (2012) 13:305­337  335

 2. W. Banzhaf, A. Leier, Genetic Programming Theory and Practice III, Chapter 14: Evolution on
    Neutral Networks in Genetic Programming. (Springer, Berlin, 2006), pp. 207­221

 3. D. Barber, Bayesian Reasoning and Machine Learning. (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
    2011)

 4. J.D. Bloom, S.T. Labthavikul, C.R. Otey, F.H. Arnold, Protein stability promotes evolvability. Proc.
    Natl. Acad. Sci. 103, 5869­5874 (2006)

 5. S. Bullock, in Proceedings of the 6th European Conference on Artificial Life. Smooth operator?
    Understanding and visualising mutation bias. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 2159 (2001),
    pp. 602­612

 6. S. Ciliberti, O.C. Martin, A. Wagner, Innovation and robustness in complex regulatory gene net-
    works. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 104, 13591­13596 (2007)

 7. M. Collins, Finding needles in haystacks is harder with neutrality. Genet. Prog. Evolvable Mach. 7,
    131­144 (2006)

 8. M.C. Cowperthwaite, E.P. Economo, W.R. Harcombe, E.L. Miller, L.A. Meyers, The ascent of the
    abundant: How mutational networks constrain evolution. PLoS Comput. Biol. 4(7), e10000110
    (2008)

 9. B. Dorronsoro, E. Alba, in IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation. A simple cellular genetic
    algorithm for continuous optimization (2006), pp. 2838­2844

10. J.A. Draghi, T.L. Parsons, G.P. Wagner, J.B. Plotkin, Mutational robustness can facilitate adaptation.
    Nature 463, 353­355 (2010)

11. M. Ebner, P. Langguth, J. Albert, M. Shackleton, R. Shipman, in Proceedings of the IEEE Congress
    on Evolutionary Computation. On neutral networks and evolvability (2001), pp 1­8

12. M. Ebner, M. Shackleton, R. Shipman, How neutral networks influence evolvability. Complexity
    7(2), 19­33 (2002)

13. E. Ferrada, A. Wagner, Protein robustness promotes evolutionary innovations on large evolutionary
    time-scales. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B 275, 1595­1602 (2008)

14. W. Fontana, P. Schuster, Continuity in evolution: On the nature of transitions. Science 280,
    1451­1455 (1998)

15. E. Galva´n-Lo´pez, R. Poli, in Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference.
    An empirical investigation of how and why neutrality affects evolutionary search (2006),
    pp. 1149­1156

16. E. Galva´n-Lo´pez, R. Poli, A. Kattan, M. O'Neill, A. Brabazon, Neutrality in evolutionary algo-
    rithms... What do we know?. Evol. Syst. 2, 145­163 (2011)

17. C. Grinstead, J. Snell, Introduction to Probability. (American Mathematical Society, Providence,
    1991)

18. I. Harvey, A. Thompson, in Proceedings of the First International Conference on Evolvable Systems:
    From Biology to Hardware. Through the labyrinth evolution finds a way: A silicon ridge (1996),
    pp. 406­422

19. E.J. Hayden, E. Ferrada, A. Wagner, Cryptic genetic variation promotes rapid evolutionary adap-
    tation in an RNA enzyme. Nature 474, 92­95 (2011)

20. T. Hu, W. Banzhaf, in Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference.
    Neutrality and variability: two sides of evolvability in linear genetic programming (2009),
    pp. 963­970

21. T. Hu, J.L. Payne, W. Banzhaf, J.H. Moore, in Proceedings of the 14th European Conference on
    Genetic Programming. Robustness, evolvability, and accessibility in linear genetic programming.
    Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 6621 (2011), pp. 13­24

22. M.A. Huynen, P.F. Stadler, W. Fontana, Smoothness within ruggedness: the role of neutrality in
    adaptation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 93, 397­401 (1996)

23. M. Isalan, C. Lemerle, K. Michalodimitrakis, C. Horn, P. Beltrao, E. Raineri, M. Garriga-Canut,
    L. Serrano, Evolvability and hierarchy in rewired bacterial gene networks. Nature 452, 840­846 (2008)

24. H. Ishibuchi, N. Tsukamoto, Y. Nojima, in Proceedings of Parallel Problem Solving from Nature X.
    Examining the effect of elitism in cellular genetic algorithms using two neighborhood struc-
    tures. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 5199 (2008), pp. 458­467

25. T. Jo¨rg, O.C. Martin, A. Wagner, Neutral network sizes of biological RNA molecules can be
    computed and are not atypically small. BMC Bioinform. 9, 464 (2008)

26. M. Kirschner, J. Gerhart, Evolvability. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 95, 8420­8427 (1998)

                                                123
336  Genet Program Evolvable Mach (2012) 13:305­337

27. P.K. Lehre, P.C. Haddow, in Proceedings of the IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation.
    Accessibility between neutral networks in indirect genotype-phenotype mappings (2005),
    pp. 419­426

28. P.K. Lehre, P.C. Haddow, in Simulated Evolution and Learning. Accessibility and runtime between
    convex neutral networks. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 4247 (2006), pp. 734­741

29. O.C. Martin, A. Wagner, Effects of recombination on complex regulatory circuits. Genetics 138,
    673­684 (2009)

30. T. Mihaljev, B. Drossel, Evolution of a population of random Boolean networks. Eur. Phys. J. B 67,
    259­267 (2009)

31. E. Murphy, M. O'Neill, A. Brabazon, in Proceedings of the 14th European Conference on Genetic
    Programming. Examining mutation landscapes in grammar based genetic programming. Lecture
    Notes in Computer Science, vol. 6621 (2011), pp. 130­141

32. M. Newman, Mixing patterns in networks. Phys. Rev. E 67, 026126 (2003)
33. M. Newman, Networks: An Introduction. (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2010)
34. M. Newman, R. Engelhardt, Effects of selective neutrality on the evolution of molecular species.

    Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B 265, 1333­1338 (1998)
35. J.L. Payne, J.H. Moore, in Proceedings of the European Conference on Artificial Life. Robustness,

    evolvability, and accessibility in the signal-integration space of gene regulatory circuits (2011),
    pp. 638­645
36. D.A. Pechenick, J.L. Payne, J.H. Moore, The influence of assortativity on the robustness of signal-
    integration logic in gene regulatory networks. J. Theor. Biol. 296, 21­32 (2012)
37. K. Raman, A. Wagner, The evolvability of programmable hardware. J. R. Soc. Interf. 8, 269­281
    (2011)
38. C. Reidys, P.F. Stadler, P. Schuster, Generic properties of combinatory maps: Neutral networks of
    RNA secondary structures. Bull. Math. Biol. 59, 339­397 (1997)
39. J. Rodrigues, A. Wagner, Genotype networks, innovation, and robustness in sulfur metabolism. BMC
    Syst. Biol. 5, 39 (2011)
40. F. Rothlauf, D.E. Goldberg, Redundant representations in evolutionary computation. Evol. Comput.
    11, 381­415 (2003)
41. P. Schuster, W. Fontana, P.F. Stadler, I.L. Hofacker, From sequences to shapes and back: a case study
    in RNA secondary structures. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B 255, 279­284 (1994)
42. R. Shipman, M. Shackleton, M. Ebner, R. Watson, in Proceedings of the 7th International Con-
    ference on Artificial Life. Neutral search spaces for artificial evolution: a lesson from life (2001),
    pp 162­169
43. T. Smith, P. Husbands, P. Layzell, M. O'Shea, Fitness landscapes and evolvability. Evol. Comput.
    10, 1­34 (2002)
44. T. Smith, P. Husbands, M. O'Shea, in Proceedings of the 6th European Conference on Artificial Life.
    Neutral networks and evolvability with complex genotype-phenotype mapping. Lecture Notes in
    Computer Science, vol. 2159 (2001), pp. 272­282
45. T. Smith, P. Husbands, M. O'Shea, in Proceedings of the IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Com-
    putation. Neutral networks in an evolutionary robotics search space (2001), pp. 136­145
46. T. Soule, Resilient individuals improve evolutionary search. Artif. Life 12, 17­34 (2006)
47. B.M.R. Stadler, P.F. Stadler, G.P. Wagner, W. Fontana, The topology of the possible: Formal spaces
    underlying patterns of evolutionary change. J. Theor. Biol. 213, 241­274 (2001)
48. van E. Nimwegen, J. Crutchfield, M. Huynen, Neutral evolution of mutational robustness. Proc. Natl.
    Acad. Sci. 96, 9716­9720 (1999)
49. L. Vanneschi, Y. Pirola, P. Collard, M. Tomassini, S. Verel, G. Mauri, in Proceedings of the Genetic
    and Evolutionary Computation Conference. A quantitative study of neutrality in GP Boolean land-
    scapes (2006), pp. 895­902
50. A. Wagner, Robustness and Evolvability in Living Systems. (Princeton University Press, Princeton,
    2005)
51. A. Wagner, Neutralism and selectionism: a network-based reconciliation. Nat. Rev. Genet. 9,
    965­974 (2008)
52. A. Wagner, Robustness and evolvability: a paradox resolved. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B 275, 91­100
    (2008)
53. A. Wagner, The Origins of Evolutionary Innovations. (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2011)
54. G. Wagner, L. Altenberg, Complex adaptation and the evolution of evolvability. Evolution 50,
    967­976 (1996)

123
Genet Program Evolvable Mach (2012) 13:305­337  337

55. J. Whitacre, A. Bender, Degeneracy: a design principle for achieving robustness and evolvability.
    J. Theor. Biol. 263, 143­153 (2010)

56. C.O. Wilke, Adaptive evolution on neutral networks. Bull. Math. Biol. 63, 715­730 (2001)
57. T. Yu, J.F. Miller, Through the interaction of neutral and adaptive mutations, evolutionary search

    finds a way. Artif. Life 12, 525­551 (2006)

                                                123
