  Robustness, Evolvability, and Accessibility in
              Linear Genetic Programming

  Ting Hu1, , Joshua L. Payne1, , Wolfgang Banzhaf2, and Jason H. Moore1

            1 Computational Genetics Laboratory, Dartmouth Medical School,
                                        Lebanon, NH 03756, USA

                 {Ting.Hu,Joshua.L.Payne,Jason.H.Moore}@Dartmouth.edu
      2 Department of Computer Science, Memorial University of Newfoundland,

                                          St. John's, NL, Canada
                                               banzhaf@mun.ca

         Abstract. Whether neutrality has positive or negative effects on evolu-
         tionary search is a contentious topic, with reported experimental results
         supporting both sides of the debate. Most existing studies use perfor-
         mance statistics, e.g., success rate or search efficiency, to investigate if
         neutrality, either embedded or artificially added, can benefit an evolu-
         tionary algorithm. Here, we argue that understanding the influence of
         neutrality on evolutionary optimization requires an understanding of the
         interplay between robustness and evolvability at the genotypic and phe-
         notypic scales. As a concrete example, we consider a simple linear ge-
         netic programming system that is amenable to exhaustive enumeration,
         and allows for the full characterization of these properties. We adopt
         statistical measurements from RNA systems to quantify robustness and
         evolvability at both genotypic and phenotypic levels. Using an ensemble
         of random walks, we demonstrate that the benefit of neutrality crucially
         depends upon its phenotypic distribution.

1 Introduction

Redundant mappings between genotype and phenotype are common in Genetic
Programming (GP). Such encodings often produce neutrality [1], where many
mutational variants of a genotype produce identical phenotypes. Conflicting
opinions have been proposed with regard to the effects of neutrality on evo-
lutionary search. While some studies have found no benefit [2,3,4], others have
claimed that neutrality provides a buffer against deleterious genetic perturbation
[5,6] and reduces the risk of premature convergence through an expansion of the
search space [7,8]. As argued in [9], the lack of consensus regarding the benefits of
neutrality largely stem from the overly complex problems, representations, and
search algorithms used in these analyses, which make it difficult to tease apart
the effects of neutrality from other confounding factors. Further, neutrality is
often artificially added to the problem representation and little attention is paid
to how this alters the fitness landscape [9].

   These authors contributed equally to this work.

S. Silva et al. (Eds.): EuroGP 2011, LNCS 6621, pp. 13­24, 2011.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2011
14  T. Hu et al.

   In natural systems, neutrality is often discussed in terms of robustness, which
can be defined as an organism's ability to maintain its phenotype in the face of
genetic perturbation. Of particular interest is the relationship between robust-
ness and evolvability [10,11], which can be defined as an organism's ability to
generate novel phenotypes. At first glance, robustness and evolvability appear
contradictory. While the former requires genetic alterations leave the phenotype
intact, the latter requires these alterations be used for the exploration of new
phenotypes. Despite this apparent paradox, empirical analyses of several nat-
ural systems have revealed that robustness can actually facilitate evolvability
[12,13,14]. In the cytochrome P450 BM3 protein, for example, increased robust-
ness increases the probability that mutants can exploit new substrates [12].

   To elucidate the relationship between robustness and evolvability in natural
systems, several theoretical models have been put forth (e.g., [15,16,17,18]). Cen-
tral to many of these analyses is the concept of a genotype network (a.k.a. a neu-
tral network), where vertices represent genotypes and edges connect genotypes
that share the same phenotype and can be interconverted via single mutational
events [10]. In this framework, robust phenotypes correspond to large genotype
networks, where most mutations are neutral and therefore leave the phenotype
unchanged. Robust phenotypes are evolvable because a population can diffuse
neutrally throughout the genotype network and build up genetic diversity [16],
which facilitates access to novel phenotypes through non-neutral mutations into
adjacent genotype networks [10].

   One of the primary advantages of discussing neutrality in terms of robustness
is that an exact measure of neutrality can be specifically assigned to each geno-
type and phenotype. This in turn allows for an assessment of the distribution of
neutrality at both the genotypic and phenotypic scales. Further, it allows for a
quantitative analysis of the relationship between robustness and evolvability. For
GP, this offers a marked improvement over previous neutrality analyses, which
typically use only performance statistics, such as success rate or search efficiency,
to estimate how neutrality affects evolutionary search.

   The exact distributions of neutrality, at the level of the genotype and phe-
notype, have never been explicitly characterized in a GP system. As such, the
influence of robustness on evolvability, and in turn on search performance, is
not well understood. Further, the ease with which a phenotype can be accessed
in an evolutionary search, and how this relates to robustness and evolvability
at the genotypic and phenotypic scales, has not been addressed. To elucidate
these relationships, we extend the work of [19] by exhaustively characterizing
the search space of a simple Linear Genetic Programming (LGP) representation
used to solve a Boolean search problem. This system offers several advantages.
First, the representation is compact; the set of all genotypes is finite and com-
putationally enumerable. Second, neutrality is intrinsic to the system; a total
of 228 genotypes map to 16 phenotypes. Third, there is a clear delineation be-
tween genotype, phenotype, and fitness, allowing for a full description of their
interplay.
Robustness, Evolvability, and Accessibility in Linear Genetic Programming  15

   By capitalizing on recent developments in the characterization of robustness
and evolvability in RNA [11,20], we provide a comprehensive quantitative anal-
ysis of the genotype and phenotype spaces in this LGP system. Using a large
ensemble of random walks, we then conduct a preliminary exploration of the
relationships between robustness, evolvability, and mutation-based search. We
discuss the implications of our results and present directions for future work.

2 Methods

2.1 Linear Genetic Programming

In the LGP representation, an individual (or program) consists of a set of L
instructions, which are structurally similar to those found in register machine
languages. Each instruction is made up of an operator, a set of operands, and a
return value. In the programs considered in this study, each instruction consists
of an operator drawn from the set {AND, OR, NAND, NOR}, two Boolean operands,
and one Boolean return value. The inputs, operands, and return values are stored
in registers with varying read/write permissions. Specifically, R0 and R1 are cal-
culation registers that can be read and written, whereas R2 and R3 are input
registers that are read-only. Thus, a calculation register can serve in an instruc-
tion as an operand or a return, but an input register can only be used as an
operand. An example program with L = 4 is given below.

                                          R1 = R2 OR R3
                                          R0 = R1 AND R2
                                          R1 = R0 NAND R1
                                          R0 = R3 NOR R1

These instructions are executed sequentially from top to bottom. Prior to pro-
gram execution, the values of R0 and R1 are initialized to FALSE. After program
execution, the final value in R0 is returned as output.

2.2 Genotype and Phenotype Networks

To facilitate the enumeration of the entire genotype and phenotype spaces, we
consider a two-input, one-output Boolean problem instance with L = 4 instruc-
tions. This sequence of instructions is referred to as the genotype. Letting C
and I denote the numbers of calculation and input registers, respectively, and
O the cardinality of the operator set, there are a total of (C × (C + I)2 × O)L
genotypes in the LGP representation. We refer to this set of programs as the
genotype space. In the system considered here (L = 4, C = 2, I = 2, O = 4), the
genotype space comprises 228 unique programs.

   These genotypes map to a considerably smaller set of phenotypes, which are
defined by the functional relationship between the input and output registers.
Specifically, the phenotype is defined by the set of outputs observed across each
of the four possible combinations of Boolean inputs. Since the outputs are also
16  T. Hu et al.

                                              R 0 = R 3 AND R 1

                                              R 1 = R 0 AND R 3

                                              R 0 = R 1 OR R 3

a                 b                           R 0 = R 3 AND R 0

                                              y

                                                 non-neutral

                  R 0 = R 3 AND R 1  neutral  R 0 = R 3 AND R 1  non-neutral  R 0 = R 3 AND R 1
                  R 0 = R 0 AND R 3           R 1 = R 0 AND R 3               R 1 = R 0 AND R 3
                  R 0 = R 1 OR R 2            R 0 = R 1 OR R 2                R 0 = R 1 OR R 2
                  R 0 = R 3 AND R 0           R 0 = R 3 AND R 0               R 0 = R 3 NOR R 0

                  x AND y                     x AND y                         x NOR y

Fig. 1. (a) Schematic diagram of a subset of genotype space in linear genetic program-
ming. Vertices correspond to genotypes, their color to phenotypes, and edges connect
genotypes that can be interconverted via point mutations. (b) These point mutations
can be neutral or non-neutral, depending on whether the phenotype is preserved. For
visual clarity, we only depict a small subset of the potential point mutations to each
genotype.

Boolean, there are 24 = 16 unique phenotypes, the set of which we refer to as
the phenotype space.

   The mapping from genotype to phenotype is highly redundant. As previously
mentioned, a convenient formalism for understanding this redundancy is a geno-
type network, in which genotypes are represented as vertices and edges connect
genotypes that can be interconverted via neutral point mutations. In this study,
we define a point mutation as a single change to an element of the instruction
set of a program. This point mutation is neutral if it does not lead to a change
in phenotype (Fig. 1).

   The number of point mutations vij between the genotype networks of pheno-
types i and j captures the number of unique mutational events that interconvert
these two phenotypes. By considering the adjacency of all genotype networks in
the genotype space, we can construct a phenotype network. Vertices correspond
to phenotypes and are weighted according to the size of their underlying genotype
network, and edges correspond to the adjacency of genotype networks and are
weighted according to the number of non-neutral point mutations between geno-
type networks (Fig. 2). By characterizing the genotype and phenotype spaces in
this way, we can describe the distribution of neutrality in this LGP system and
gain insight into how this distribution influences robustness and evolvability.

2.3 Robustness, Evolvability, and Accessibility

Several measures of robustness and evolvability exist in the literature, at both the
genotypic and phenotypic scales. Following [11], we define genotypic robustness as
the fraction of the total number of possible point mutations to a given genotype
that are neutral. Genotypic evolvability is defined as the fraction of the total
Robustness, Evolvability, and Accessibility in Linear Genetic Programming        17

                                  x >= y

                        !x AND y                         x <= y
         x AND !y                                                       x AND y

x == y                                                      x OR y

x XOR y                                                                          x NOR y

FALSE                                                       x NAND y

         TRUE                                            x

               !y                              y

                                      !x

Fig. 2. Phenotype network for linear genetic programming with two inputs, one output,
and four instructions. Each vertex comprises a genotype network, as depicted in Fig.
1, and thus vertex size corresponds to phenotypic robustness. Edge width denotes the
number of non-neutral point mutations between two phenotypes (vij ). Phenotypes are
labeled according to their functional relationship between input and output, where x
and y denote the inputs stored in registers R2 and R3, respectively.

number of possible phenotypes that are accessible through non-neutral point

mutations to a single genotype. Phenotypic robustness is defined as the size of

the phenotype's underlying genotype network.

For phenotypic evolvability, we consider two metrics. The first E1 is simply the

proportion of the total number of phenotypes that can be reached via non-neutral

point mutations from a given phenotype [11]. The second E2 provides a more

nuanced analysis of the potential to mutate from one phenotype to another [20].

Letting

                   fij =              , vij    if i = j                          (1)

                                      k=i vik

                                  0,           if i = j

denote the fraction of non-neutral point mutations to genotypes of phenotype i
that result in genotypes of phenotype j, we define the evolvability E2 of pheno-
type i as
18  T. Hu et al.

                  E2,i = 1 - fi2j .  (2)

                     j

This captures the probability that two randomly chosen non-neutral point muta-
tions to genotypes of phenotype i result in genotypes with distinct phenotypes.
This metric takes on high values when a phenotype is adjacent to many other
phenotypes and its non-neutral mutations are uniformly divided amongst these
phenotypes. It takes on low values when a phenotype is adjacent to only a few
other phenotypes and its non-neutral mutations are biased toward a subset of
these phenotypes.

   In addition to measuring the propensity to mutate away from a phenotype,
we also measure phenotypic accessibility [20], which is formally defined as

                  Ai = fji.          (3)

                  j

This metric takes on high values if phenotype i is relatively easy to access from
other phenotypes, and low values otherwise.

3 Results

3.1 Statistical Characteristics of Genotype and Phenotype Space

To characterize the genotype and phenotype spaces of the two-input, one-output
LGP system of L = 4 instructions, we exhaustively enumerated the size and
structure of the genotype networks corresponding to each of the 228 individual
genotypes.

   In Fig. 2, we depict the corresponding phenotype network. The network is fully
connected, such that any phenotype can be reached directly from any other. How-
ever, the number of non-neutral point mutations between phenotypes, depicted
by edge width, is heterogeneous. Some phenotypes are mutationally biased to-
ward a small subset of phenotypes (e.g., Fig. 2, x), while others mutate nearly
uniformly to all other phenotypes (e.g., Fig. 2, x XOR y). Phenotypic robustness,
depicted by vertex size, is also heterogeneous and ranges from a minimum of
24,832 genotypes to a maximum of 60,393,728 genotypes (occupying 1% and
23% of genotype space, respectively). Each phenotype comprises a single geno-
type network, as opposed to multiple independent genotype networks. Thus, any
genotype yielding a specific phenotype is reachable through a series of neutral
point mutations from any other genotype with the same phenotype.

   In Figs. 3a,b, we depict the distributions of genotypic robustness and geno-
typic evolvability for the representative phenotype FALSE. Within this pheno-
type, and all others in this system, the distribution of genotypic robustness is
bimodal (Fig. 3a), while the distribution of genotypic evolvability is unimodal
(Fig. 3b). These properties are inversely related, such that genotypes of greater
robustness are less evolvable (Fig. 3c).

   The means of the distributions of genotypic robustness and evolvability vary as
a function of phenotypic robustness. Specifically, average genotypic evolvability
Robustness, Evolvability, and Accessibility in Linear Genetic Programming                                                           19

0.14 a                                                                                      b
0.10                                                                                  0.2

Frequency                                                                             0.1
                                                                           Frequency
0.06

0.02

0       0.2  0.4                          0.6    0.8       1                          00       0.2  0.4  0.6                0.8  1

             Genotypic Robustness                                                                   Genotypic Evolvability

                                          0.7 c
                                          0.6

                  Genotypic Evolvability  0.5

                                          0.4

                                          0.3

                                          0.2

                                          0.1

                                          0

                                          0.2         0.4     0.6                              0.8  1

                                                      Genotypic Robustness

Fig. 3. Properties of genotypes within the phenotype FALSE. Distributions of (a) geno-
typic robustness and (b) genotypic evolvability for all  60 million genotypes. (c)
Relationship between genotypic evolvability and genotypic robustness for 10,000 ran-
domly sampled genotypes. The solid line represents the best linear fit to the data, and
is provided as a guide for the eye.

decreases logarithmically as a function of phenotypic robustness (Fig. 4a, R2 =
0.95). This intuitive observation implies that within robust phenotypes, most
mutations are neutral and do not allow access to adjacent phenotypes. It follows

that the individual genotypes that make up robust phenotypes are collectively

more robust. Indeed, we observe that the average genotypic robustness increases
logarithmically as a function of phenotypic robustness (Fig. 4b, R2 = 0.98).

   The relationship between phenotypic evolvability and phenotypic robustness

is less intuitive. Because the phenotype network is fully connected, all pheno-
types are equally and maximally evolvable according to E1 (filled circles, Fig.
4c). In contrast, when mutational biases are taken into account with E2, pheno-
typic evolvability exhibits a nonlinear relationship with phenotypic robustness

(open circles, Fig. 4c). Phenotypic evolvability is lowest for phenotypes of in-
termediate robustness (x AND !y, !x AND y), and then increases logarithmically
with increasing phenotypic robustness (R2 = 0.87). The relationship is made
non-monotonic by the high evolvability of the least robust phenotypes (x XOR y,
x == y).
20     T. Hu et al.

                                      

  
                                


                                      

                                      

                                      

                                                                                          

                                      

                                                                                  
    

                          
                                  
    

                                
                                      

    


    


    
                                                                                     

                                
                                                         


                                                                                    

Fig. 4. Statistical properties of genotype and phenotype networks in linear genetic
programming. Genotypic (a) evolvability and (b) robustness and phenotypic (c) evolv-
ability and (d) accessibility as a function of phenotypic robustness. The data in (a,b)
correspond to the average of all genotypes within a given phenotype and error bars
denote their standard deviation. The solid lines correspond to the best (a,b) logarith-
mic, (c) piecewise logarithmic, and (d) power-law fit to the data, and are provided as
a guide for the eye. In (c), two measures of phenotypic evolvability are shown.

   Phenotypic accessibility increases monotonically as a function of phenotypic
robustness, following a power-law (Fig. 4d, R2 = 0.99). This implies that random
mutations are more likely to lead to robust phenotypes than to non-robust phe-
notypes. Taken together, these results suggest that the most robust phenotypes
are both easy to find (Fig. 4d) and highly evolvable (Fig. 4c), with the exception
of the least robust phenotype, which is simultaneously the least accessible and
the most evolvable of any of the phenotypes in this system.

3.2 Random Walks through Genotype and Phenotype Space

To begin to understand the implications of these observations for mutation-
based search, we consider an ensemble of random walks. For each of the 16 × 16
possible combinations of phenotypes, we designate one phenotype as a source
and the other as a target. We then perform 1000 random walks, starting from a
randomly chosen genotype in the source phenotype and ending when the random
Robustness, Evolvability, and Accessibility in Linear Genetic Programming                                21

                   105  a                                          b

Mean waiting time  104

                   103

                   102

                   101     0.84  0.86                        0.88     10-1  100
                     0.82

                           Evolvability of source phenotype           Accessibility of target phenotype

Fig. 5. Mean waiting time of a random walk as a function of (a) the source phenotype's

evolvability and (b) the target phenotype's accessibility. The solid lines corresponds to
the best (a) exponential and (b) power-law (T  A-5/3) fit to the data. Both lines are

provided as a guide for the eye.

walk reaches any genotype in the target phenotype. Each step in the random

walk corresponds to a single point mutation. We record the average number of
steps required to get from one phenotype to another, which we refer to as the

mean waiting time.

   In Fig. 5, we depict the mean waiting time of a random walk as a function of
the source phenotype's evolvability (Fig. 5a) and the target phenotype's accessi-

bility (Fig. 5b). While the mean waiting time is independent of the evolvability
of the source phenotype (R2 = 0.001), it is strongly correlated with the ac-
cessibility of the target phenotype (R2 = 0.99). Specifically, the mean waiting
time T decreases as a function of target accessibility according to the power-law
T  A-5/3. Thus, accessible phenotypes are found more rapidly by random mu-
tation than less accessible phenotypes. As highly accessible phenotypes are also

highly robust (Fig. 4d), random mutation leads to robust phenotypes.

4 Discussion

The results of this study have helped to clarify how the distributions of neu-
trality at the genotypic and phenotypic scales affect the relationship between
robustness and evolvability in linear genetic programming (LGP). At the geno-
typic level, robustness and evolvability were found to be negatively correlated
with one another (Fig. 3c), echoing previous results regarding RNA landscapes
[11]. This intuitive observation suggests that robust genotypes are located far
from the periphery of the genotype network, prohibiting direct mutational access
to adjacent genotype networks. Further support for this claim could be obtained
through a topological analysis of the genotype networks, which could also help
to explain the observed bimodality in the distributions of genotypic robustness
(Fig. 3a).
22  T. Hu et al.

   Within a given phenotype, the distribution of genotypic robustness was het-
erogeneous, where some genotypes were vastly more robust than others (Fig.
3a). In addition, all genotypes within a phenotype formed a single genotype net-
work, such that any genotype was reachable from any other through a series of
neutral point mutations. Taken together, these results suggest that genotypic
robustness is an evolvable property in LGP. A caveat of this observation is that
any selective pressure for genotypic robustness comes at the expense of reduced
genotypic evolvability (Fig. 3c).

   At the phenotypic level, the relationship between robustness and evolvability
varied depending on how evolvability was defined (Fig. 4c). When defined by
the total connectivity of a phenotype in the phenotype network (E1), evolvabil-
ity was independent of robustness; all phenotypes were maximally evolvable. In
contrast, when mutational biases were taken into account (E2), the relationship
between evolvability and robustness was nonlinear, with phenotypes of interme-
diate robustness exhibiting the lowest evolvabilities. These results contrast with
those made in RNA systems where E1 was found to be positively correlated [11],
and E2 negatively correlated, with robustness [20]. However, accessibility and ro-
bustness were positively correlated (Fig. 4d), in line with observations made in
RNA systems and supporting the intuitive notion that larger phenotypes are
easier to access.

   To explore the implications of these observations for evolutionary search, we
considered an ensemble of random walks between source and target phenotypes.
The mean waiting time of random mutation to reach a target phenotype was
found to be uncorrelated with the evolvability of the source phenotype (Fig. 5a),
a result that calls into question the utility of existing phenotypic evolvability
measures. While these measures provide useful information concerning the im-
mediate adjacency of phenotypes [11] and their mutational biases [20], they are
too myopic to predict the length of an evolutionary trajectory from one pheno-
type to another. Consider, for example, that correlations may exist between the
evolvabilities of adjacent phenotypes, such that high evolvability phenotypes are
mutationally biased toward low evolvability phenotypes. As these correlations
(a.k.a. mixing patterns [21]) are not taken into account, the applicability of cur-
rent phenotypic evolvability measures are left severely constrained, at least for
this system.

   In contrast, the mean waiting time of random mutation to reach a target pheno-
type was strongly correlated with the target phenotype's accessibility (Fig. 5b).
Our observations suggest that this relationship follows a power-law of the form
T  A-5/3. We believe this relationship may lend itself to analytical treatment,
which could prove useful in generalizing our results to other phenotype networks.
For instance, it remains to be seen whether target accessibility is predictive of
mean waiting time in phenotype networks that are not fully connected. Recent
analyses of random walks on weighted complex networks [22] may provide a use-
ful starting point for this analysis.

   There has been much debate regarding the benefit of neutrality in evolu-
tionary computation. Using a simple set of experiments, recent analysis has
Robustness, Evolvability, and Accessibility in Linear Genetic Programming  23

demonstrated this benefit to be problem dependent [9]. Our results provide a
more subtle picture. Using the notion of robustness to compartmentalize neu-
trality into specific phenotypes, we have shown that it is not only the presence
of neutrality that affects mutation-based search, but also how this neutrality
is distributed amongst phenotypes. The more robust the target phenotype, the
easier it will be for evolution to identify it.

   To fully understand how robustness, evolvability, and accessibility influence
evolutionary search, future analyses will have to take fitness into consideration.
In the Boolean search problem considered herein, for example, fitness could be
assigned as a function of phenotypic distance from the target [19]. As only five
distinct fitness values exist in our LGP system, this form of fitness assignment
would add a new layer of robustness and evolvability to the analysis. Specif-
ically, this layer would consist of a set of vertices that each comprise multiple
phenotypes, and links between these vertices would capture all mutational events
that lead from one fitness value to another. While fitnesss would therefore mod-
ify the transition probabilities between phenotypes, selection would modify the
transition probabilities between fitness values. Understanding how these layers
interact to influence evolutionary search is left for future research.

   Future work will also consider population-based evolutionary search and the
role of recombination. We are particularly interested in analyzing population
diffusions throughout genotype and phenotype networks [23], under mutational
and recombinative variation operators, to understand how robustness and evolv-
ability change as a function of phenotypic distance to the target.

Acknowledgments

This work was partially supported by NIH grants R01-LM009012, R01-LM010098,
and R01-AI59694. J.L.P. was supported by NIH grant K25-CA134286. W.B. ac-
knowledges support from NSERC Discovery Grants, under RGPIN 283304-07.

References

 1. Banzhaf, W.: Genotype-phenotype mapping and neutral variation - a case study
     in genetic programming. In: Davidor, Y., M¨anner, R., Schwefel, H.-P. (eds.) PPSN
     1994. LNCS, vol. 866, pp. 322­332. Springer, Heidelberg (1994)

 2. Smith, T., Husbands, P., O'Shea, M.: Neutral networks and evolvability with
     complex genotype-phenotype mapping. In: Kelemen, J., Sos´ik, P. (eds.) ECAL
     2001. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 2159, pp. 272­282. Springer, Heidelberg (2001)

 3. Smith, T., Husbands, P., O'Shea, M.: Neutral networks in an evolutionary robotics
     search space. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation,
     pp. 136­145 (2001)

 4. Collins, M.: Finding needles in haystacks is harder with neutrality. Genetic
     Programming and Evolvable Machines 7, 131­144 (2006)

 5. Yu, T., Miller, J.F.: Through the interaction of neutral and adaptive mutations,
     evolutionary search finds a way. Artificial Life 12, 525­551 (2006)
24  T. Hu et al.

 6. Soule, T.: Resilient individuals improve evolutionary search. Artificial Life 12,
     17­34 (2006)

 7. Harvey, I., Thompson, A.: Through the labyrinth evolution finds a way: A silicon
     ridge. In: Proceedings of the First International Conference on Evolvable Systems:
     From Biology to Hardware, pp. 406­422 (1996)

 8. Ebner, M., Shackleton, M., Shipman, R.: How neutral networks influence evolv-
     ability. Complexity 7(2), 19­33 (2002)

 9. Galv´an-Lo´pez, E., Poli, R.: An empirical investigation of how and why neutral-
     ity affects evolutionary search. In: Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary
     Computation Conference, pp. 1149­1156 (2006)

10. Wagner, A.: Neutralism and selectionism: a network-based reconciliation. Nature
     Reviews Genetics 9, 965­974 (2008)

11. Wagner, A.: Robustness and evolvability: a paradox resolved. Proceedings of the
     Royal Society London B 275, 91­100 (2008)

12. Bloom, J.D., Labthavikul, S.T., Otey, C.R., Arnold, F.H.: Protein stability
     promotes evolvability. Proceedings of the National Academy of the Sci-
     ences 103(15), 5869­5874 (2006)

13. Ferrada, E., Wagner, A.: Protein robustness promotes evolutionary innovations on
     large evolutionary time-scales. Proceedings of the Royal Society London B 275,
     1595­1602 (2008)

14. Isalan, M., Lemerle, C., Michalodimitrakis, K., Horn, C., Beltrao, P., Raineri, E.,
     Garriga-Canut, M., Serrano, L.: Evolvability and hierarchy in rewired bacterial
     gene networks. Nature 452, 840­846 (2008)

15. Draghi, J.A., Parsons, T.L., Wagner, G.P., Plotkin, J.B.: Mutational robustness
     can facilitate adaptation. Nature 463, 353­355 (2010)

16. Huynen, M.A., Stadler, P.F., Fontana, W.: Smoothness within ruggedness: The
     role of neutrality in adaptation. Proceedings of the National Academy of the
     Sciences 93, 397­401 (1996)

17. Newman, M., Engelhardt, R.: Effects of selective neutrality on the evolution of
     molecular species. Proceedings of the Royal Society London B 265, 1333­1338
     (1998)

18. Whitacre, J., Bender, A.: Degeneracy: a design principle for achieving robustness
     and evolvability. Journal of Theoretical Biology 263, 143­153 (2010)

19. Banzhaf, W., Leier, A.: Genetic Programming Theory and Practice III. In: Genetic
     Programming Theory and Practice III, pp. 207­221. Springer, Heidelberg (2006)

20. Cowperthwaite, M.C., Economo, E.P., Harcombe, W.R., Miller, E.L., Meyers, L.A.:
     The ascent of the abundant: how mutational networks constrain evolution. PLoS
     Computational Biology 4(7), e10000110 (2008)

21. Newman, M.: Mixing patterns in networks. Physical Review E 67, 026126 (2003)
22. Noh, J.D., Rieger, H.: Random walks on complex networks. Physical Review

     Letters 92(11), 118701 (2004)
23. van Nimwegen, E., Crutchfield, J., Huynen, M.: Neutral evolution of mutational

     robustness. Proceedings of the National Academy of the Sciences 96, 9716­9720
     (1999)
