                                        Full citation: Huizinga, J., Stanley, K.O. and Clune, J., 2018. The
                                        emergence of canalization and evolvability in an open-ended, interactive
                                        evolutionary system. Artificial life, 24(3), pp.157-181.

                                        The Emergence of Canalization and Evolvability in an
                                             Open-Ended, Interactive Evolutionary System

arXiv:1704.05143v2 [cs.NE] 14 Feb 2019          Joost Huizinga           Kenneth O. Stanley                   Jeff Clune
                                               Evolving AI Lab                    EPLex                   Evolving AI Lab
                                        Dept. of Computer Science                                  Dept. of Computer Science
                                          University of Wyoming     Dept. of Computer Science        University of Wyoming
                                            jeffclune@uwyo.edu     University of Central Florida       jeffclune@uwyo.edu

                                                 Uber AI Labs          kstanley@cs.ucf.edu                  Uber AI Labs
                                            jhuizinga@uber.com                                         jeffclune@uber.com

                                        Keywords: Generative encoding, interactive evolutionary computation, canalization, struc-
                                        tural organization, divergent search

                                                                                                    Abstract

                                                          Many believe that an essential component for the discovery of the tremen-
                                                          dous diversity in natural organisms was the evolution of evolvability,
                                                          whereby evolution speeds up its ability to innovate by generating a more
                                                          adaptive pool of offspring. One hypothesized mechanism for evolvability
                                                          is developmental canalization, wherein certain dimensions of variation
                                                          become more likely to be traversed and others are prevented from being
                                                          explored (e.g. offspring tend to have similarly sized legs, and mutations
                                                          affect the length of both legs, not each leg individually). While ubiqui-
                                                          tous in nature, canalization is rarely reported in computational simula-
                                                          tions of evolution, which deprives us of in silico examples of canalization
                                                          to study and raises the question of which conditions give rise to this
                                                          form of evolvability. Answering this question would shed light on why
                                                          such evolvability emerged naturally and could accelerate engineering ef-
                                                          forts to harness evolution to solve important engineering challenges. In
                                                          this paper, we reveal a unique system in which canalization did emerge
                                                          in computational evolution. We document that genomes entrench cer-
                                                          tain dimensions of variation that were frequently explored during their
                                                          evolutionary history. The genetic representation of these organisms also
                                                          evolved to be more modular and hierarchical than expected by random
                                                          chance, and we show that these organizational properties correlate with
                                                          increased fitness. Interestingly, the type of computational evolutionary
                                                          experiment that produced this evolvability was very different from tra-
                                                          ditional digital evolution in that there was no objective, suggesting that
                                                          open-ended, divergent evolutionary processes may be necessary for the
                                                          evolution of evolvability.

                                        Contact author

                                                                                                1
1 Introduction

The functional organisms produced by natural evolution are unfathomably di-
verse, from single celled-bacteria like E. Coli to large mammals like elephants.
The success of natural evolution is especially remarkable when one consid-
ers that it is fueled by mostly random and unrelated changes at the genetic
level [57, 58, 79, 80, 96]. As such, it is believed that natural evolution was
aided by the emergence of evolvability [1, 23, 28, 45, 50, 51, 57, 96, 101, 124],
i.e. the emergence of genetic properties that increase the effectiveness of evolu-
tion.

    Evolvability in natural systems is facilitated by many different innovations,
a few of which are genetic structures like Hox genes [99, 125], sexual reproduc-
tion [49, 84, 124], the evolution of mutation rates [7, 97], structural organization
in the form of modularity and hierarchy [22, 39, 55, 81, 124] (discussed in greater
detail below), and the emergence of standardized body plans [41, 132]. In this
paper, we will focus on a particularly interesting driver of evolvability known
as developmental canalization [16, 31, 117, 122], which ties together many of
the aforementioned concepts. Canalization is the process whereby certain phe-
notypic dimensions of variation become resistant to genetic changes such that
other, possibly more adaptive dimensions of variation are more likely to be ex-
plored. Here, a dimension of variation refers to a phenotypic trait that can
vary individually, or a set of phenotypic traits that vary in concert. For exam-
ple, change in the length of the right leg of a human would be one dimension
of variation, and coordinated change in both legs represents another dimen-
sion of variation. As it turns out, in humans it is rare that one leg becomes
substantially longer or shorter than the other [4], but there exists considerable
variation in leg length between individuals [9], indicating that variations in hu-
man leg length have been canalized (specifically, the ability to individually vary
leg lengths has been reduced, and the ability to vary both at once has been
created).

    Canalization is ubiquitous in natural systems and, as result, one might ex-
pect that forms of canalization are consistently encountered in models and com-
putational simulations of evolution as well. The opposite appears to be true;
forms of canalization are rarely reported in computational simulations of evo-
lution despite significant efforts to promote and discover it [3, 6, 17, 33, 61,
105, 109, 119, 123, 126], suggesting that these simulations do not adequately
represent the full capacity of natural evolution. In contrast, this paper uniquely
showcases evidence for the spontaneous emergence of canalization in Picbreeder,
an interactive and open-ended system of simulated evolution, and we discuss
why and how such canalizations may have emerged in this system, but not in
others (Fig. 1).

    It is important to note that the emergence of evolvability, including canaliza-
tion, does not require the evolutionary process to have knowledge about future
environmental changes; that is, evolvability is not a form of "directed evolu-
tion" [72]. Instead, it is widely believed that evolvability can emerge based on
the evolutionary history of lineages [23, 28, 45, 60, 61, 101, 129]. In short, in-
          Most Picbreeder images                                   Some Picbreeder images

      feature forms of canalization                                  show poor canalization

      Mutating single genes of these images                     Mutating single genes of these images
holistically affects distinct aspects of the image             affects none or many parts of the image

                      Mutation in  Mutation in Mutation in                        Mutation in   Mutation in  Mutation in
                      Object Only                                                  No Effect   Eye And Body   Distortion
Parent                             Shadow Only Spotlight Only  Parent                  gene
                           gene                                                                       gene        gene
                                   gene   gene

         Offspring                                                           SOifnfgsplering
        after single                                                        afgteernesingle
                                                                           mmutuattaiotinon
         mutation
                                                                       These images have little structural
These images have a structurally organized                                 organization in their genome
   (i.e. modular and hierarchical) genome

        Global Lighting                                                No Effect
              genes                                                      genes

Shadow Only                        Spotlight Only
     genes                               genes

Object Only                                                                                    Dolphin Eye
    genes                                                                                       And Body
                                                                                                   genes

                                   Shadow And                    Global
                                   Object genes                Distortion

                                                                 genes

        These images have fit decendants                       These images have unfit decendants

             Decendants                                                 Decendants
            after several                                              after several
             generations                                                generations

Figure 1: Picbreeder images that have canalized dimensions of varia-
tion display structural organization in their genome and have higher
quality descendants. The left and right panel show the properties of two
different Picbreeder images. Left: properties for a Picbreeder image that
has canalized many intuitive dimensions of variation. Right: properties for
a Picbreeder image that has canalized only a few, unhelpful dimensions of vari-
ation. The top row shows the original image, and three different variants acces-
sible through a single mutation. Here, the variants in the left panel have been
enlarged to better show how a single mutation can affect very specific parts of
the image. The middle row shows the genome of the image, with colored boxes
around groups of genes that affect similar parts of the image. The bottom row
shows three different descendants of the image. The three properties are cor-
related; images that have canalized interesting dimensions of variation tend to
have structurally organized genomes, and their descendants are often of higher
quality.
dividuals whose genome is structured such that beneficial mutations are more
likely and detrimental mutations are less likely have a better chance of produc-
ing viable offspring, meaning such evolvability can be directly selected through
the benefits it provides. Provided that some forms of selection are persistent
over evolutionary time while others vary, such as mismatching legs always being
detrimental while optimal leg length varies over time, genetic structures that
increased the probability of beneficial mutations in the past may do so in future
environments as well.

    Despite the fact that evolvability and canalization are often regarded as
essential for the evolution of complex organisms, their origins remain an ac-
tive topic of research and debate [1, 23, 28, 45, 50, 51, 57, 96, 101, 124]. The
main challenge in answering questions regarding the origins of evolvability and
canalization is that they are difficult to study in vivo; oftentimes, properties
of interest can be difficult to measure, change, or control for [51, 95]. In ad-
dition, biological populations evolve slowly; even rapidly reproducing microor-
ganisms take on the order of weeks to experience a few hundred generations of
evolution [34], and the findings from these microorganisms do not necessarily
generalize to their more slowly reproducing counterparts [75].

    An alternative is to study these questions in computational simulations of
evolution instead. While they may not seem as compelling as in vivo exper-
iments, computational simulations can greatly improve our understanding of
evolutionary processes, and have shed light on a variety of complex evolution-
ary questions, including the evolution of altruism [20, 86], structural organi-
zation such as modularity [22, 39, 55, 56, 127, 128], regularity [52, 114], and
hierarchy [24, 81], mutation rates [7, 19, 21, 131], sexual reproduction [5, 84],
genomic complexity [73, 74, 124], gene duplication [63, 98, 125], and coevolu-
tion [42, 94, 135], to name but a few. Computational simulations are partic-
ularly attractive because the experimenters have full control over all variables
involved in the evolutionary processes and, provided that the fitness function is
simple, modern hardware can run thousands of generations of evolution in just
a couple of days, allowing for rapid prototyping of hypothesis.

    Unfortunately, while canalization is ubiquitous in nature [16, 31, 122], clear
examples of canalization in computational simulations are rare [3, 6, 17, 33,
40, 43, 47, 61, 105, 109, 119, 123, 126], meaning that we lack a proper starting
point from which to conduct experiments because we can not study canaliza-
tion in computational simulations of evolution if we can not produce it in the
first place. The fact that we do not know how to reproduce canalization also
means that, when tackling challenging engineering problems with the help of
evolutionary algorithms [14, 15, 18, 25, 36, 65, 76­78, 93, 110, 134], those al-
gorithms are missing a key property that made natural evolution successful,
possibly explaining why most evolutionary algorithm research restricts itself to
fairly simple, uni-modal tasks [8, 13, 55].

    While such experiments are rare, the following investigations in computa-
tional simulation did touch upon the principles of canalization. Draghi and
Wagner demonstrated the evolution of evolvability in a model where the sum
of two vectors needed to reach a target point in a two-dimensional space [33].
Vectors were specified by angle and magnitude, but angle mutations were much
less common than magnitude mutations. After evolution, the angles between
vectors would reflect the evolutionary history; if the target point remained
stationary, the angles between vectors was arbitrary, but if the target point
changed frequently, the angles between vectors were close to 90°, such that the
entire space of possibly fit phenotypes could be quickly reached through mag-
nitude mutations alone. Here, the angle between the two vectors controlled
which dimensions of variation were more or less likely to be explored, and the
evolutionary history determined which angle became fixed in the population,
thus representing a rudimentary form of canalization.

    Another form of canalization was demonstrated by Kouvaris et al., who
worked with a model where groups of phenotypic traits had to be co-expressed
to gain fitness [61]. That is, the front wings, hind wings, and antennae of an
abstract insect consisted of several parts, and all parts needed to be expressed
simultaneously to form a functional body part. The environment cycled between
favoring individuals with front wings and antennae, favoring individuals with
both front and hind wings but no antennae, or favoring insects without any
of these traits. Provided that the environment changed at the right frequency,
individuals evolved such that mutations would either express or repress entire
groups (i.e. modules) of phenotypic traits (e.g. complete wings or complete
antennae), but never cause partial expression within a group. These groups of
phenotypic traits presented a clear example of canalization, although achieving
this effect required a fairly strict set of environmental conditions to emerge.

    As we will present in this paper, a possible source of canalization is genotypic
structural organization in the forms of modularity and hierarchy. Following a
conventional definition [22, 39, 55, 59, 82, 111], a genome is considered modular
if it consists of groups of genes that have many interactions with genes in the
same group, but few interactions with genes in other groups. A genome is
considered hierarchical if interactions result in an ordered structure, such that
interactions predominantly go from high-level structures, which tend to have
global effects, to low-level structures, which are generally associated with local
changes. Structural organization in terms of modularity, hierarchy, or both,
have been found in the gene regulatory networks of many species, including E.
Coli [104], sea urchin [100], yeast [64], and Drosophila [92]. Such structural
organization can lead to canalization if it changes the likelihood with which
phenotypic traits will change. For example, if two phenotypic traits are encoded
by a single genotypic module, a single mutation is likely to affect both traits,
whereas if the two traits are encoded by separate modules, there is a better
chance that only one of those traits is affected. Similarly, if a genotype is
hierarchically organized, a single mutation to a high-level component is likely
to affect many phenotypic traits simultaneously, whereas a single mutation to
a low-level genotypic component will probably only affect a single trait.

    Research regarding structural organization has shown that, when individuals
needed to adapt to a modularly changed environment (i.e. the overall goal
in the changed environment would differ, but many of the sub-problems in
the environment would remain unchanged), structurally organized individuals
both evolved and had increased evolvability (i.e. adapted faster) compared
to unstructured individuals [22, 39, 55, 81]. These experiments implicitly also
demonstrated a form of canalization, because structurally organized individuals
were much more likely to rewire sub-problems than unstructured individuals.
In other words, for structurally organized individuals, dimensions of variation
related to environmental sub-problems were much more likely to be explored,
whereas dimensions of variation related to more holistic changes in the behavior
of the individual were less likely to be explored. However, most of this research
focused on individuals with a direct encoding (i.e. the phenotype and genotype
are equivalent), precluding the wide array of genetic interactions present in
biological organisms [16, 31, 41, 122]. Research that did examine the effects of
structural organization with a developmental encoding did not report on forms
of canalization [52, 53].

    The above experiments provide some proofs of concept for the evolution of
canalization in computational simulations, but their models are simple. The
present research shows the evolution of canalization in a more complex, open-
ended system: the images evolved on Picbreeder.org, a website for the inter-
active evolution of pictures (Fig. 1 top). We also show that many Picbreeder
genomes display structural organization in the forms of modularity and hi-
erarchy, and we present examples where the structural organization directly
corresponds to the observed canalizations (Fig. 1 middle). In addition, the re-
sults suggest that these structurally organized genomes are generally more fit
in terms of offspring (Fig. 1 bottom). Lastly, we will discuss the differences
between Picbreeder and other computational simulations of evolution, and ar-
gue that the emergence of canalization may be directly facilitated by the ever
changing, divergent, goalless nature of Picbreeder. The implication is that, as
has been recently argued [66, 69, 103, 115], the success of natural evolution may
not be due to short-term competition over common resources, but is enabled
instead by the long-term tendency to invade new niches and avoid competition
altogether.

2 Methods

2.1 Picbreeder

Picbreeder.org is a website, first presented by Secretan et al. [107], where users
can interactively and collaboratively evolve images. Users visiting the site can
"breed" images similar to how one might breed livestock; the user starts with
an initial population of images from which the user can select the images he or
she finds most promising. Those will then be mated and mutated to form the
next generation of images, and the process repeats. The user can continue this
process until satisfied or bored, and can then choose to publish the result to
the website, such that the results can serve as a seed for other users. Since its
inception, over 10, 000 images have been published on Picbreeder [108].

    The evolutionary process is driven by the NeuroEvolution of Augmenting
Topologies (NEAT) evolutionary algorithm [116]. NEAT is an algorithm for
the evolution of networks. It starts with simple networks, and slowly increases
the size of the networks by adding nodes and connections. To evolve images
with NEAT, the images are represented through an artificial genetic encoding
called Compositional Pattern Producing Networks (CPPNs), as described in
Section 2.2. Whenever a CPPN is mutated, every weight in the network has a
chance of being changed by replacing it with a random number drawn from a
normal distribution with a mean equal to the original weight of the connection
and a variance of 1. In addition, there is a small chance of adding a connection
between two unconnected nodes, and there is a small chance of adding a new
node onto an existing connection. When multiple images are selected, their
underlying CPPNs may be combined through crossover. To perform crossover
between networks, following the convention of NEAT, nodes and connections in
the network are first aligned by matching historical markings; unique identifiers
that are assigned to every node and connection the first time they are added to a
CPPN. Nodes and connections that are present in both parents will be randomly
selected from either parent, whereas nodes and connections only present in one
parent will always be added. The original NEAT algorithm also includes fitness
sharing through speciation, added to preserve diversity within the population,
but fitness sharing is not in effect on Picbreeder because the individuals that get
to reproduce are directly chosen by the user. Further details and parameters
are described in [107] and [106].

    When starting evolution, the user can choose to start from scratch, or to
branch from an existing image. If the user chooses to start from scratch, the
initial population of images will consist of simple geometric patterns, as specified
by the initial small, randomized genomes (Sec. 2.2). However, if the user chooses
to start from an existing image, the initial population will consist of direct
offspring of the selected image. For the purpose of measuring the reproductive
success of an image, we define the fitness of an image as the number of direct
descendants of that image, where a direct descendant is defined as an image that
was branched, evolved, and published directly by a single user from the original
image without any of the intermediate forms being published. This measure of
fitness encapsulates both the quality of the parent, because interesting images
have a higher chance of being selected by a user for further evolution, and the
evolvability of the parent, because users are unlikely to publish descendants if
they were unable to introduce any interesting new changes in said descendants.
This metric is noisy (an image placed on the front page for a long period of time,
such as an "editors pick" or top-rated image, may have many more descendants
than a qualitatively similar image that did not make it to the front page), but
it is arguably informative when taken in aggregate.

    It is important to note that, in contrast to most classic experiments with
evolutionary algorithms, Picbreeder has no overall goal. That is, while any
individual user will select images that are aesthetically pleasing or interesting
in some way, there is no "target image" that needs to be found. In addition,
while users may form goals during a session, long lineages are often evolved
by many different users, who may all have different strategies and motivations
during image selection.

2.2 CPPNs

The genomes of the Picbreeder images are known as Compositional Pattern
Producing Networks (CPPNs) [112], which are an abstraction of developmental
processes. CPPNs have been described at length many times previously [13,
26, 44, 106, 112, 114], so here we only briefly describe them and how they ab-
stract developmental biology. Consider the development of any multi-cellular
organism: The organism will start as a single stem cell, which will multiply
over time to form the mass of the organism. To form different functional parts
of the organism, stem cells will have to determine what kind of cell to become
(e.g. muscle, bone, neuronal, etc.), i.e. their cell fate. The proper fate of a cell
depends on its location in the developing organism; a cranial cell may have to
become part of the central nervous system, whereas a distal cell may have to
become part of a claw. In developing organisms, a cell can effectively glean its
location by measuring the concentrations of different proteins and other chem-
icals, jointly referred to as morphogens [121], which form gradients through-
out the developing organism. For example, if there exists a morphogen that
is only produced at the extreme anterior of the organism, but slowly diffuses
throughout the entire organism, the concentration of that morphogen provides
location information with respect to the anteroposterior (front to back) axis.
If a sufficient number of these morphogens are present over different axis (an-
teroposterior, dorsoventral, mediolateral, etc.), a cell can determine its location
and hence its fate.

    While these morphogens are effective at signaling position information to
developing cells, simulating the diffusion of such morphogens is computationally
expensive, which is why simulated diffusion-based artificial organisms are often
restricted in size [10]. However, in computational simulations of development,
global positional information can be relayed directly to a cell, without the need
to simulate diffusion. Inspired by this idea, CPPNs are functions from global
positional information to cell fate; they take the position of a cell, such as the
x and y coordinates of a pixel, and return its fate, in this case the color value
(Fig. 2).

    An arbitrary function from position to cell fate is not sufficient to cap-
ture the power of developmental biology. For example, diffusing chemicals can
spread smoothly in all directions, giving rise to symmetry. Genes can respond
to their own gradients, enabling repeated patterns. Genes can also compose
different gradients by responding only when multiple different morphogens are
present (or absent) at the same time. To capture these properties, CPPNs are
compositions of regular functions with specific behaviors; for example, Gaus-
sian functions can provide symmetry, sine waves can provide repetition, and
step functions like sigmoids can confer the ability to respond only when all
necessary gradients are present (Fig. 2, middle).

    Each node in the CPPN is associated with one of these functions, and nodes
interact with each other through weighted connections. At any node, the in-
Phenotype (image)             Genotype (CPPN)            Intermediate representation

                              Final pixel color      Intermediate pixel color

                          -1                     1   -1  1

     0,4 1,4 2,4 3,4 4,4                         XY           0,4 1,4 2,4 3,4 4,4
     0,3 1,3 2,3 3,3 4,3                                      0,3 1,3 2,3 3,3 4,3
Y 0,2 1,2 2,2 3,2 4,2                                    Y 0,2 1,2 2,2 3,2 4,2
     0,1 1,1 1,1 3,1 4,1                                      0,1 1,1 1,1 3,1 4,1
     0,0 1,0 2,0 3,0 4,0                                      0,0 1,0 2,0 3,0 4,0

                   X                                                        X

Figure 2: CPPNs are functions from position to fate. Left: To encode
an image with a CPPN, every pixel in the image needs to have a geometric
coordinate. Middle: The geometric coordinate of each pixel is then passed
to the CPPN, which computes one or more values that determine the color
of the pixel. For grayscale images (shown), the network will have a single
output determining pixel intensity, whereas for color images the network will
have two additional outputs for hue and saturation. Right: The activation of
intermediate nodes in a CPPN is visualized in the same way that the final output
of the network is visualized, namely, by mapping the output of the intermediate
node to pixel color. However, to make the functioning of intermediate nodes
more clear, negative values for these nodes are mapped to red, rather than
white.

coming values are multiplied by the corresponding connection weights, and the
sum is passed to the function of that node. The input to the network is a
geometric coordinate, and the output represents the cell fate, which will be the
color of a pixel in an image.

    Within a CPPN, every node can be considered as a gene that produces
a unique morphogen, and the output of the node can be considered as the
expression pattern of that gene. Because the Picbreeder CPPNs describe 2-D
images, the expression of an intermediate node can be visualized by creating a
2-D image where each pixel is colored according to the output of the node at
that location (Fig. 2, right). For the purpose of such visualizations, pixels for
intermediate nodes are colored from red (-1), to black (0), to white (1).

    Different paths in the CPPN may result in different intermediate patterns,
which may later be combined to form the final output. As such, CPPNs can
model many different interactions including pleiotropy, redundancy, and dif-
ferent developmental pathways without sacrificing computational tractability,
making the model appropriate for the study of evolvability and canalization.

2.3 Analysis

To analyze the CPPNs produced by Picbreeder, we developed a tool called
CPPN-Examiner (CPPN-X). It makes it possible to pick any connection in
the network and slowly change its weight while directly observing the effect
on the pattern produced. The tool also allows labeling these connections and
thereby makes it possible to create a fully annotated version of the network
(e.g. Fig. 5 right). To ensure that our analysis is relevant to all Picbreeder
images, we faithfully modeled the CPPN-X tool after the online code base,
written by Secretan et al. [106, 107]. We opted for creating a separate, offline
tool to allow for additional computational optimizations of the CPPN, which
greatly increased the speed at which the program can render the effect of weight
changes, enabling us to view the effect of weight changes smoothly and in real
time. The source code is available at www.evolvingai.org/CPPN-X.

    Connections in genomes were annotated according to the following proce-
dure. First, a not-yet-labeled connection was selected and we swept across the
possible values for that connection from its minimum (-3) to its maximum value
(3) at a 0.1 interval, viewing each intermediate image produced. In some rare
cases, the 0.1 interval would be too coarse to properly observe the effect of the
sweep and, in those cases, we decreased the interval to 0.01. Then, we qualita-
tively classified the resulting change and annotated the connection accordingly.
When assigning a label, we ignored background changes that occurred when
the weight got far (generally 1 unit or more) from its original value (see SI
Fig. 46 for examples). We ignored these changes because we are interested in
the effect of small genetic mutations, as those are considered to be an effective
basis for modeling evolutionary processes [12]. It is likely that every functional
connection will cause some background changes if its weight is changed by a
sufficiently large number and, as such, we do not believe that this effect should
define the primary function of that connection.

    After all connections were labeled, we merged classes with similar effects
(e.g. merged classes such as "Move Spotlight Left-Right" and "Move Spotlight
Up-Down" into a "Spotlight Only" class) to reveal the high-level functional
decompositions of the genomes. In effect, this kind of manual experimentation
and annotation is like a kind of artificial bioinformatics for Picbreeder CPPNs.
Files containing the fine-grained decompositions are available for download at:
www.evolvingAI.org/PicbreederCanalization.

    Nodes were assigned labels according to the majority label among their
incoming connections. Because we did not vary any attributes of the nodes,
this labeling holds no additional information, and only serves to improve visual
clarity.

    It is important to note that this analysis of canalization is inherently sub-
jective, as it requires a human observer to classify the nature of each change.
While an objective measure of canalization would have been preferable, to the
best of our knowledge, there does not exist an appropriate, objective measure
of canalization for images at this time. For example, naive metrics, such as
localized change of pixel values in response to mutations, do not cover all rel-
evant forms of canalization. Moving an object from one location in an image
to another location in the image without changing the shape of the object is
considered an important form of canalization, but such canalization does not
result in localized changes in pixel intensities. Conversely, a local change in
pixel intensities affecting arbitrary parts of different objects in an image is gen-
erally not considered a form of canalization, yet it would be valued as such.
It may seem that such issues could be resolved by employing techniques based
on automated object recognition systems (e.g. deep neural networks [62]), as
these systems are often associated with a sense of objectivity not attributed to
human observers. However, there are still many problems that need to be re-
solved before an automated system can replace a human observer in the current
domain, as these systems may see objects that are not actually there [89], may
misclassify objects due to imperceptible changes [118], and can inherit their
own bias from the training data [54].

    Despite the lack of an appropriate method for objectively measuring canal-
ization, we do not believe that studying canalization in images should be avoided
just because humans are (currently) the only agents capable of properly inter-
preting the data. Indeed, many fields, such as those that study animal and
human behavior, have to rely on human judgments (e.g. of whether two an-
imals are fighting, cooperating, hugging, etc.) [2, 27, 130]. As in those fields,
and as has been argued before specifically in the context of harnessing human
judgements in evaluating evolutionary algorithms [113], while it is important
to note that the judgments are made by humans, and are thus subjective, more
is learned through good, albeit imperfect, measuring devices than by not per-
forming any measurements at all. In addition, to facilitate an open discussion
regarding our results and interpretations, many examples are included in this
paper and its supplementary material, and the visualization tool, capable of
accessing and analyzing our complete data set of Picbreeder genomes, is freely
available so that readers may judge for themselves the extent to which they
agree with our subjective interpretations.

    To validate that the previously described labeling process was fair and not
biased by our knowledge of the hypothesis of canalization, we tested whether in-
dependent people would provide similar labels as those presented in this paper.
To do so, we compared the labeling presented in this paper against the labels
provided by individuals recruited through Amazon's Mechanical Turk program,
a service where one can pay workers to conduct arbitrary tasks online. Because
it was too expensive to obtain the number of labels necessary for proper statis-
tical analysis (which was at least 30 labels per connection) for every connection
in every genome analyzed in this paper and its SI, we were only able to conduct
this validation for a single genome. However, because the process used to label
all images was the same (and we did not know at that time we would perform
extra validation on any genome), if the process is found to be sufficiently accu-
rate for one genome, it is likely that the process was accurate for all genomes.
We decided to conducted the test on the central, focal genome-and-image pair
presented in this paper named "Spotlight Casting Shadow" (Fig. 5). The re-
sults show that the Mechanical Turk workers, who were independent and not
informed of our hypothesis, assigned labels to connections similar to those in
the presented labeling (SI Fig. 45) and that the presented labeling is not an
outlier among the Mechanical Turk workers on three different metrics that mea-
sure to what degree a labeling matches the aggregate data obtained from the
Mechanical Turk experiment (SI Fig. 48). As such, the analysis confirms that
our labeling process was indeed fair and consistent with the labelings obtained
from independent individuals. The full analysis and experimental details can
be found in the SI (SI Sec. 4).

3 Results

To examine whether Picbreeder images canalized dimensions of variation, we
selected one image that a user titled "Spotlight Casting Shadow" (Fig. 4). We
selected it because it visually appears to contain a clearly distinct object in the
image (the object), a correlated attribute (the shadow), and an independent,
but also conceptually distinct entity (the spotlight). We thus wondered how
these entities would respond to changes in the genome. One possibility was that
this image would behave like a face seen in clouds. To us, human observers, such
a shape may appear to consist of various different entities, such as eyes, a nose,
and a mouth. However, as the clouds change shape in the wind, one would not
expect any of these components to be preserved. For example, it is exceedingly
unlikely for the expression on the face to cycle through different expressions,
or the eyes to open and shut, or the entire face to expand appropriately, etc.
Instead, most often shapes seen in clouds are ephemeral, and quickly morph
back into an amorphous cloud (or perhaps an entirely different shape), without
any regard for the meaning once assigned to the shape and its parts. The same
could have been true for this Picbreeder image, where the relationships between
the different entities within the image would be solely within the eyes of the
beholder, and where changes to the genotype would simply cause the image to
become scrambled in unrecognizable ways. However, as described below, we
discovered that the genome not only evolved to enable the different aspects
of the image to be independently controlled while preserving their meaning,
but that the dimensions of variation for these objects are sensible in that they
enable changes to the image in a way that humans might expect the objects to
be manipulated.

    To test whether such conclusions extended to other images, we then analyzed
the 12 most branched images from Picbreeder (recall that being branched can
be considered a form of fitness in this system). We specifically tested whether
their CPPN genomes contained links that affected a single, qualitative aspect of
the image. To make this determination, we annotated the genome as described
in Sec. 2.3. Images of all 13 fully labeled networks, including representative
examples of variation, can be found in SI (SI Sec. 2).

    Canalizations of dimensions of variation were found in every Picbreeder
image we examined. While the images differed in the quality and quantity
of canalizations, even the images that seemingly consist of arbitrary patterns
have canalized some interesting dimensions of variation. Two example di-
mensions of variation for three different images are shown in Fig. 3. Full
videos of these and other transitions are available at: www.evolvingai.org/
PicbreederCanalization.
                                         Apple body size

                                        Apple stem swing

                               Insect with shrinking antennae

                                      Insect growing horns

                           Skull winking with left and right eye

                                    Skull mouth open-close

Figure 3: Many images on Picbreeder have canalized dimensions of
variation. From left to right, each row represents the effect of sweeping over
a single gene (connection) in the underlying CPPN genome, along with our
subjective interpretation of the effect of changing that connection.
    We picked the Spotlight Casting Shadow image to present in detail in this
paper (Fig. 4), though most other images we analyzed have qualitatively similar
properties (SI Sec. 2). While the image itself appears to have separate compo-
nents (the object, its shadow, and the spotlight), it could have been the case
that genetically these features were not decomposed and could not be altered
independently. Surprisingly, however, the CPPN genome does contain individ-
ual connections specialized to modify only one of these three different entities.
We found dimensions of variation corresponding to the size of the object, the
size of the shadow, and the size and position of the spotlight (Fig. 4). More-
over, we also found connections that change multiple entities in a coordinated
fashion; the object and the shadow can be modified together such that both
objects can grow or shrink simultaneously, which is the behavior one would ex-
pect if the shadow was actually cast by the object. Note that such canalization
is not an inherent, inevitable property of CPPNs: the image titled "Dolphin"
(Fig. 1 right) features several visually distinct components, such as the eye of
the dolphin, the snout of the dolphin, the head of the dolphin, and the water in
the background, but most genes in the Dolphin CPPN are highly pleiotropic,
and affect all of those components simultaneously.

    From a visual inspection of the genome, color-coded to show the effect of
each connection, it is apparent that the connections that control independent
dimensions of variation are not randomly distributed throughout the genome
(Fig. 5). Instead, the genome exhibits a modular and hierarchical organization
whereby different clusters of connections enable the manipulation of different
dimension of variation in the image, and where "higher level" modules affect
multiple aspects of the image while "lower level" modules affect single aspects
of the image. The genome starts with two "high level" modules, one affecting
the object and the shadow, and the other affecting the spotlight. The "Object
And Shadow" module feeds into two "lower level" modules that affect only the
object or only the shadow of the object. Lastly, all information is aggregated
into a "Global Lighting" module, which affects the brightness of the entire image
without affecting the shapes within the image.

    Curiously, the "Object Only" module also feeds into the "Shadow Only"
module, which raises the question why changes to the "Object Only" module
do not affect the shadow. This observation is important because, if changes to
the "Object Only" module did affect the shadow, there would be no "Object
Only" module, and the image would have lost several independent dimensions
of variation. It turns out that the final image can be faithfully reconstructed by
replacing the connections between the "Object Only" module and the "Shadow
Only" module with connections from the bias input to the "Shadow Only" mod-
ule, thus demonstrating that these connections from the "Object Only" module
to the "Shadow Only" module only serve as a bias (SI Fig. 42). As such, the
"Object Only" and "Shadow Only" modules are two low-level modules that are
only related because they both receive their information from the higher level
"Object And Shadow" module.

    This structural organization directly corresponds to the different dimensions
of variation that have been canalized; the object and the shadow can be manip-
Components of the Spotlight Casting Shadow image.

Spotlight  Object
 Shadow

Object and shadow size together (Fig 5, Link 1)

Shadow size without object (Fig 5, Link 2)

Object size without shadow (Fig 5, Link 3)

Spotlight from left to right (Fig 5, Link 4)

Spotlight from top to bottom (Fig 5, Link 5)

Spotlight size (Fig 5, Link 6)

Figure 4: The genome of the Spotlight Casting Shadow image, evolved
on Picbreeder, has canalized various dimensions of variation. The top
panel shows the different components of the image. Each row represents the
effect of changing the values of a single gene (connection) from low to high in
the underlying CPPN genome (Fig. 5, labels correspond to the link numbers).
ulated both together and separately because there exist hierarchically organized
modules that process those aspects together and separately. This also explains
why there are no connections that affect only the object and the spotlight to-
gether (but not the shadow); there is simply no location in the genome where
only these two properties are processed together. As such, the Spotlight Casting
Shadow genome is a practical example of how structural organization can lead
to canalization. Witnessing this structural organization in the Object Casting
Shadow and many other genomes (SI Sec. 2), led us to hypothesize that, in
general, some canalizations in CPPN genomes are facilitated by a modular and
hierarchical structure. Because modularity and hierarchy can be quantitatively
measured, we investigated whether these properties exist at elevated levels in
Picbreeder genomes.

    We first tested the hypothesis that these genomes have evolved to have
elevated levels of modularity. If Picbreeder images have indeed canalized di-
mensions of variation through modularity, and if those canalizations provide an
evolutionary advantage, one would expect that, on average, Picbreeder genomes
are more modular than randomly generated null models. To test this, we ap-
proximated the maximal modularity-Q score for directed networks [70] for each
network in the Picbreeder database, which at the time we were given a copy
of it contained 9585 genomes, and we compared those values against the sim-
ilarly approximated maximal modularity-Q score of random null models. The
modularity Q-score of a network, given a particular division of the network into
modules, indicates the fraction of edges that lie within a module (as opposed
to connecting two different modules), minus the expected value of that same
fraction for a randomly connected network [70]. The network division that
maximizes the modularity Q-score is known as an optimal split (approximated
with an efficient, eigenvector-based method [70, 88]) and the corresponding
Q-score of that optimal split is widely accepted as a measure of network mod-
ularity [11, 22, 48, 55, 81, 82].

    To generate fair null-models, two factors needed to be controlled for: 1) that
the Picbreeder genomes were produced under a set of very specific constraints
related to the NEAT algorithm (e.g. a fixed number of inputs and outputs, no
recurrent connections, no disconnected nodes), and 2) that the networks in our
data set are not all independent from each other. To control for these factors, 10
null models were generated for each Picbreeder network, where each null model
was generated by iteratively applying NEAT "add node" and "add connection"
mutations to the parent of the Picbreeder network until the null model had
the exact same number of nodes and connections as the Picbreeder network.
Here, the parent network refers to the most recent published ancestor of the
Picbreeder network if it was branched, or the minimal starting network if it was
created from scratch. Because Picbreeder does not feature any deletion muta-
tions, this ensured that the null models underwent the same types of mutations
as the actual network. This way, the only explanation for a difference between
a network and its null models lies with the selection processes that happened
between the parent and the child. Finally, the average modularity Q-score of
the null models was subtracted from the modularity Q-score of the real network
2  6

                               3
                                      1

                                                5

                                             4

Figure 5: The canalization of various dimensions of variation are ex-
pressed in the connections of the CPPN genome for the Spotlight
Casting Shadow image. Right: the CPPN genome with arrows pointing
to links that individually change a canalized aspect of the image. The colors
indicate which part of the network controls which aspect of the final image
(see legend for details). For visual clarity, connections that had no or little
effect have been removed in this visualization (the full genome can be seen in
SI Sec. 2.13). The numbers refer to link numbers from Fig. 4. Left: the final
and intermediate images when sweeping over link 3.
(a) 2.0 Fitness against modularity                 (b) 3 Fitness against hierarchy
Fitness
                                                   Number of ImagesLinear fit

                                                                Fitness
                                                                                                                  Number of Images
                Linear fit                    103                                                  103
1.5
                                                   2
1.0                                           102                                                    102

0.5                                           101  1                                               101

0.0 -0.08-0.04 0.00 0.04 0.08 0.12 0.16 0.20  100  0 -0.12-0.08-0.040.00 0.04 0.08 0.12 0.16 0.20  100

     Residual modularity                              Residual hierarchy

Figure 6: Genomic modularity and hierarchy have a positive correla-
tion with fitness. (a) There exists a positive and significant correlation

   between residual modularity and fitness (Pearson's correlation coefficient:
     0.026, p = 0.012). (b) Similarly, there exists a positive and significant
    correlation between residual hierarchy and fitness (Pearson's correlation
       coefficient: 0.037, p = 0.00028). For genomes with different residual

modularity and residual hierarchy levels, the bars indicate average fitness and
the whiskers indicate the 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals of the average
 (obtained by resampling 5000 times). Colors represent the number of images
represented by each bar. Note that the color map depicts a log-scale, meaning
 that the lightly colored bars represent orders of magnitude fewer data points
than the darkly colored bars. The black line indicates the best linear fit of the

                                        underlying data.

to arrive at the residual modularity score provided throughout this paper. Be-
cause we subtract null-model modularity-Q, a residual modularity greater than
zero indicates that a network is more modular than expected by chance. We
found that Picbreeder genomes are significantly more modular than the ran-
dom null-models (median residual modularity: 0.0039[0.0034, 0.0045] with 95%
bootstrapped confidence intervals, p = 0 Wilcoxon signed rank test).

    Another way to check whether modular genomes provide an evolutionary
advantage in Picbreeder is to see whether there exists a positive correlation
between (residual) modularity and fitness, where fitness is expressed as the
number of times an image was branched and subsequently saved by a user.
There exists a significant relationship between residual modularity and fitness
(Pearson's correlation coefficient: 0.026, p = 0.012), suggesting that modularity
does indeed have a positive effect on successful reproduction (Fig. 6a).

    Ideally, we would test whether modularity correlates with canalization, but
we currently have no general way of quantifying canalization. Instead, we ex-
amined whether the algorithmically detected modules correspond to our man-
ually annotated decompositions of the genomes, which would indicate that the
algorithmically detected modules are indeed associated with a particular func-
tion. While not as fine-grained, the automatically detected modules, in terms
of connections, do correspond roughly with the manually labeled modules for
the Spotlight Casting Shadow image (Fig. 7). However, this alignment is not
as clear for other images, especially when the objects in the image are more
overlapped (SI Sec. 2). Thus, while we have shown that modularity provides an
evolutionary advantage, it is still an open question to what degree modularity
leads to canalization in Picbreeder images.

    Second, we quantitatively investigated the role of hierarchy within the sub-
ject genomes. As with modularity, we first examined whether Picbreeder images
are more hierarchical than randomly generated networks. To do so, we quanti-
fied network hierarchy based on a metric described by Mones et al. (2012) [85].
The idea of this metric is that, in hierarchical networks, a small number of
nodes have a large influence while most nodes have little influence, whereas in
a non-hierarchical network nodes tend to have more similar levels of influence.
Thus, if a network is hierarchically organized, we expect a greater variance in
node influence within the network than in a non-hierarchical network. Mones et
al. (2012) [85] quantify influence in terms of Local Reaching Centrality (LRC),
originally defined as a function of the number of reachable nodes and the weights
along the paths to those nodes. Because we are interested in CPPN structure
regardless of weights, we define LRC solely based on the number of reachable
nodes, as described in previous work [81]. Given an LRC value for each node,
the raw hierarchy can be calculated as the average of the normalized differences
between each node and the maximum LRC in the network. As in previous
work that measured the hierarchy of feedforward networks with this metric,
we reverse all edges before we apply the measure to avoid certain pathological
results [81]. In addition, to control for the effect of evolutionary constraints and
interdependence between related networks, the average raw hierarchy of the ten
null models described previously was subtracted from the hierarchy score of the
original network to arrive at the residual hierarchy score reported throughout
this paper.

    On average, Picbreeder networks are significantly more hierarchical than the
randomly generated null models (median residual hierarchy: 0.00018 [1.1·10-16,
0.00052] and 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals, p = 8.0 · 10-118 Wilcoxon
signed rank test). In addition, there exists a significant and positive correlation
between residual hierarchy and fitness (Pearson's correlation coefficient: 0.037,
p = 0.00028), where networks with a higher residual hierarchy have an increased
fitness (Fig. 6b). Thus, it appears that in addition to modularity, hierarchy
also has a positive effect on the reproductive success of images, meaning that
users unknowingly select for genomes that have these organizational properties.
Because the hierarchy measure does not provide a hierarchical decomposition,
we cannot check whether the measured hierarchy does indeed correspond with
the manually observed hierarchy. As such, testing to what degree hierarchy
leads to canalization in Picbreeder images remains a topic for future work.

    Thus far, we have shown images that have canalized various dimensions of
variation, as well as an example of how, in some cases, structural organization
can be the root of such canalization. This leaves us with the question of how
these canalizations behave over evolutionary time. To answer this question, we
examined the role of single connections in all ancestors of an image titled "Man
(a)  (b)

Figure 7: Canalization may occur through hierarchical and modular
structures. The modules found to produce the maximum modularity score
are shown on the left (a) and those found after manual functional analysis are
shown on the right (b). While only discovering two modules, the split found
algorithmically to produce the maximum modularity value corresponds to the
functional analysis of the network, roughly dividing the network in an "Object"
module (left, blue) and a "Spotlight And Shadow" module (left, red).
Figure 8: Once discovered, canalizations are preserved. The small images
at the top of the figure display the variation when sweeping over different values
for the connection indicated by the arrow. Left: A single link (indicated by the
arrow) affects only the size and shape of the keyhole in an object a user titled
"Doorknob." Middle: The same link in a descendant 61 generations later only
affects the size of the object in the Spotlight Casting Shadow image. Right:
Another 35 generations later the same link only affects the size and shape of
the man in an image titled "Man Standing Silhouette."

Standing Silhouette," a descendant of the Spotlight Casting Shadow image.
Because the NEAT algorithm in Picbreeder labels connections with historical
markings [116], it is straightforward to track connections over generations. We
found that these canalizations and their genetic causes persist across evolution-
ary time, serving similar functional roles even in very different looking images
(Fig. 8). The fact that these innovations are preserved over evolutionary time
may explain why canalization appears to be so ubiquitous on Picbreeder; even if
the emergence of these innovations is rare, their persistence means that genomes
can accumulate them over time.

    Similarly, once an interesting image structure is discovered, the genetic
structures that encode it can be preserved throughout the evolutionary pro-
cess. One especially striking example of this process comes from an image
named "Ghost Face Spooky," which contains a genetic structure that gives rise
Figure 9: Once discovered, canalizations can radiate. Different lineages
all containing the same protoface. For every pair of images, the top image
shows the internal protoface (the same node is preserved and shown in all de-
scendants), and the bottom image shows the final image (i.e. the output of the
CPPN). The discovery of the protoface was a major innovation in Picbreeder
(occurring first in the leftmost image, named "Ghost Face Spooky"). This proto-
face enabled the evolution of a wide variety of different faces (all the other
images shown). In some lineages the protoface changed dramatically, while in
other lineages the protoface remained virtually the same, and most variation
there is due to changes outside of the protoface elsewhere in the genome. The
full CPPN genome with the annotated location of the protoface is available for
four of these images in the SI (SI Sec. 2.2, 2.3, 2.10, and 2.11).
to a protoface (Fig. 9 left and SI Fig. 41). In its descendants, the underlying
image concept (e.g. a face) is still present, but it can be altered in a variety
of ways to result in very different face images (Fig. 9). In other words, the
nodes and connections that produce the face concept are roughly preserved,
but the exact weights and connectivity of those structures, and thus the pixel-
by-pixel image pattern that results from it, can change dramatically. As such,
the genetic structures that give rise to this face concept functionally act as a
"face" module that is preserved yet modified throughout generations. This phe-
nomenon is somewhat reminiscent of "adaptive radiations" [46], where once an
evolutionary innovation is discovered (e.g. the four-legged body plan) there is
a cascade of new evolutionary species that take advantage of the new innova-
tion, but apply it in very different ways (e.g. elephants, dolphins, crocodiles,
kangaroos, different apes, etc.).

4 Discussion

While we have shown examples of canalization in Picbreeder images, it is
still unclear why canalizations have evolved in this system, but not in oth-
ers. Clearly, the user somehow selects for genomes that have canalized various
dimensions of variation. However, the genome is not visible to the user and
canalization, being a property solely describing how an image might change, is
not directly discernible from the image itself. In fact, one might have expected
the dolphin (Fig. 1 right) to be better canalized, but it is not, potentially ex-
plaining why its descendants are generally of poor quality and have a low fitness
(in terms of the number of times branched). Thus, to answer why canalizations
have evolved on Picbreeder, we will have to examine how a collection of inde-
pendent users was able to consistently select for canalized genomes.

    One concept that has often been presented as a driver for the emergence
of structural organization and evolvability, if not canalization directly, is the
idea of a changing, rather than a static, environment [33, 56]. While previ-
ous research generally alternated between a few fixed environments [33, 56],
the Picbreeder system takes such selection to extremes, because the multitude
of different users, and how those users may change their objectives, results in
a highly dynamic environment where there exists selection in many different
directions that continually change over evolutionary time. Such a selection
regime, where there exists selection in many different directions, has also been
referred to as divergent search [103]. The divergent nature of Picbreeder has
been posited as an essential property for its success, as the resulting images
often do not resemble the intermediate stepping stones [133] (see also Fig. 9).
Consider the case of evolving the Spotlight Casting Shadow image (Fig. 8 mid-
dle). Previous research has shown that direct selection for any particular target
image, such as by taking the difference in pixel intensities as a fitness measure,
only works for very simple shapes, such as the circle of the spotlight [133]. More
complex shapes, like the object with its shadow, are unlikely to ever be discov-
ered this way. However, from its evolutionary history we know that to discover
the Object Casting Shadow image, we may first have to select for something
that resembles a door-knob with a keyhole (Fig. 8 left). While we know the
evolutionary history for this particular image, there is no way of knowing the in-
termediate stepping stones for any yet to be evolved image. Evolving the image
of a house might require selecting images that resemble a fire hose, teakettle,
and school bus first. The many different selection pressures present in a system
like Picbreeder circumvent the issue of unknown stepping stones by providing
evolutionary advantages for anything that looks interestingly different, thus
preserving all potential stepping stones.

    To understand how divergent search can increase evolvability, it is helpful
to examine what happens with the genome under different selection regimes.
When a genome is subject to selection towards a particular goal, the genome
tends to expand in size as it collects and preserves small beneficial muta-
tions [133]. For example, in the domain of images, such mutations may cause a
small number of pixels to get closer to their desired intensities. This way, the
genome incrementally acquires a structure that allows for small, local changes.
The downside of such genomic growth is that, in the extreme, every aspect
of the phenotype can be changed independently, making coordinated changes
much less likely. In the Spotlight Casting Shadow image, changing the size
of the spotlight would require hundreds of coordinated mutations if every pixel
had to be adjusted independently. Such fine-grained genetic representations are
far less likely to evolve in a system with a divergent selection regime, such as
Picbreeder. When there is selection for interesting change, rather than selection
towards a particular goal, mutations that are most likely to be preserved are
mutations that have large, yet coordinated effects (large uncoordinated effects,
such as flipping every pixel in the image randomly, are generally not consid-
ered interesting). For example, in the Doorknob image (Fig. 8 left), a user is
much more likely to select an image where the size of the keyhole is changed
as a whole than an image where some individual pixels of the keyhole change
color, or where every pixel in the image changes color. This way, selection for
interesting change is likely to result in genetic structures that favor coordinated
changes over small incremental changes, or large uncoordinated changes.

    While single-objective algorithms [29, 35] (or algorithms with a few fixed
objectives [30]) are still the norm within the field of evolutionary computa-
tion [29, 30, 35], a new family of evolutionary search algorithms explicitly fo-
cuses on divergent search [67, 68, 87, 90, 103]. These algorithms, which are often
referred to as illumination algorithms or quality diversity algorithms [87, 103],
attempt to find the unknown stepping stones towards solutions by selecting for
individuals that are interestingly different from anything found before. The
main challenge for these algorithms is to quantify "interestingness," because
most problem domains allow individuals to be different in ways that are un-
likely to result in stepping stones towards anything (e.g. white noise in image
space). The algorithm known as Novelty Search selects individuals with the
help of a distance function, where individuals that are far away from previously
discovered individuals have an evolutionary advantage [67, 68]. Essential for
the success of Novelty Search is the choice of distance function, because this
function determines whether any particular difference is interesting [67, 68, 83].
Another algorithm, known as MAP-Elites, offers a large number of different
niches reserved for individuals with particular phenotypic characteristics [87].
Here the success of the algorithm depends on the choice of characteristics, which
need to be descriptive enough to preserve potential stepping stones without
making the number of niches intractably large [25, 87, 120]. Directly based on
MAP-Elites is an algorithm known as the Innovation Engine, where the dif-
ferent niches are not merely reserved for individuals with different phenotypic
characteristics, but where each niche may have a completely different fitness
function [90]. For example, when evolving images, one niche may favor indi-
viduals resembling cars, while another niche may favor individuals resembling
dolphins. In its basic implementation the niches are determined in advance,
and thus the choice of niches will determine the success of the algorithm, but in
future implementations, niches may be determined dynamically [90]. While all
of these algorithms incorporate the divergent, goalless property of Picbreeder
to a greater or lesser extent, none of them have thus far explicitly reported
forms canalization. Examining the genomes produced by these algorithms, and
looking into the differences between them and Picbreeder, may shed more light
on the origins of canalization and evolvability.

    It is debatable to what extent the ever-shifting Picbreeder environment re-
sembles natural evolution. On the one hand, natural evolution involves the
presence of many different niches and environments, which may appear, disap-
pear and change over time [32, 38, 91, 102], thus resulting in divergent selection.
On the other hand, natural evolution also includes long periods in which envi-
ronments remain stable, emphasizing the effects of directional and stabilizing
selection towards exploiting established niches [37, 71], selective forces which
are mostly absent in the Picbreeder system (there are few evolutionary advan-
tages for an image to remain identical, because users are unlikely to publish an
image if they failed to produce at least some kind of change). It is probably a
combination of both forces that define natural evolution, which might explain
why natural genomes contain both potential for variation, but also feature many
innovations whose main purpose is to reduce arbitrary variation and mutations
in descendants.

    Our understanding of the relationship between canalization and genomic
structural organization remains incomplete. It is clear that, in some cases,
structural organization can directly lead to canalization. However, we have
also observed cases where networks with low modularity and hierarchy scores
have canalized various dimensions of variation, and it is not hard to imagine a
network that features structural organization, but not canalization. As such,
we expect these properties to be correlated, but not always causally related.
Given a good quantification of canalization it would be straightforward to test
this hypothesis, but for now that remains an open challenge for future work.
5 Conclusion

While ubiquitous in nature, canalizations -- the propensity of genomic struc-
tures to be mutationally robust against changes in some dimensions of variation
(ways in which individual or combinations of phenotypic traits can change), such
that other, possibly more adaptive dimensions of variation, are free to vary --
rarely emerge in computational simulation. We have shown the emergence of
canalization in the goalless and open-ended system of Picbreeder, a website for
the interactive evolution of images. An example was investigated where these
canalizations are the result of structural organization in the genotype, in the
form of modularity and hierarchy, and such genomic structural organization
increases the reproductive success of individuals. Lastly, we argued that the
divergent, goal-free nature of Picbreeder may be an important driver for the
spontaneous evolution of canalization.

6 Acknowledgments

Support came from the Santa Fe Institute to KS and JC, a National Science
Foundation CAREER award (CAREER: 1453549) to JC, and a National Sci-
ence Foundation Robust Intelligence grant no. IIS-1421925 to KS. Any opin-
ions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Science Foundation.

References

   [1] Abzhanov, A., Kuo, W. P., Hartmann, C., Grant, B. R., Grant, P. R., &
       Tabin, C. J. (2006). The calmodulin pathway and evolution of elongated
       beak morphology in darwin's finches. Nature, 442 (7102), 563­567.

   [2] Altmann, J. (1974). Observational study of behavior: sampling methods.
       Behaviour , 49 (3), 227­266.

   [3] Ancel, L. W., Fontana, W., et al. (2000). Plasticity, evolvability, and
       modularity in rna. Journal of Experimental Zoology, 288 (3), 242­283.

   [4] Auerbach, B. M., & Ruff, C. B. (2006). Limb bone bilateral asymmetry:
       variability and commonality among modern humans. Journal of human
       evolution, 50 (2), 203­218.

   [5] Azevedo, R. B. R., Lohaus, R., Srinivasan, S., Dang, K. K., & Burch,
       C. L. (2006). Sexual reproduction selects for robustness and negative
       epistasis in artificial gene networks. Nature, 440 (7080), 87­90.

   [6] Bassler, K. E., Lee, C., & Lee, Y. (2004). Evolution of developmental
       canalization in networks of competing boolean nodes. Physical review
       letters, 93 (3), 038101.
 [7] Bedau, M. A., & Packard, N. H. (2003). Evolution of evolvability via
      adaptation of mutation rates. Biosystems, 69 (2), 143­162.

 [8] Blynel, J., & Floreano, D. (2003). Exploring the t-maze: Evolving
      learning-like robot behaviors using ctrnns. In Workshops on Applications
      of Evolutionary Computation, (pp. 593­604). Springer.

 [9] Bogin, B., & Varela-Silva, M. I. (2010). Leg length, body proportion,
      and health: a review with a note on beauty. International journal of
      environmental research and public health, 7 (3), 1047­1075.

[10] Bongard, J. C., & Pfeifer, R. (2003). Evolving complete agents using
      artificial ontogeny. In Morpho-functional Machines: The New Species,
      (pp. 237­258). Springer.

[11] Bullmore, E. T., & Sporns, O. (2012). The economy of brain network
      organization. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 13 (5), 336­349.

[12] Bulmer, M. G. (1971). The effect of selection on genetic variability. The
      American Naturalist, 105 (943), 201­211.

[13] Cheney, N., MacCurdy, R., Clune, J., & Lipson, H. (2013). Unshackling
      evolution: Evolving soft robots with multiple materials and a power-
      ful generative encoding. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary
      Computation Conference, (pp. 167­174). ACM.

[14] Chiel, H. J., Beer, R. D., Quinn, R. D., & Espenschied, K. S. (1992).
      Robustness of a distributed neural network controller for locomotion in a
      hexapod robot. Robotics and Automation, IEEE Transactions on, 8 (3),
      293­303.

[15] Chung, H., Asnodkar, A. P., & Teuscher, C. (2012). A structural analysis
      of evolved complex networks-on-chip. In Proceedings of the Fifth Interna-
      tional Workshop on Network on Chip Architectures, (pp. 17­22). ACM.

[16] Clarke, G. M., & McKenzie, J. A. (1987). Developmental stability of
      insecticide resistant phenotypes in blowfly; a result of canalizing natural
      selection. Nature, 325 (6102), 345­346.

[17] Clune, J., Beckmann, B. E., McKinley, P. K., & Ofria, C. (2010). In-
      vestigating whether HyperNEAT produces modular neural networks. In
      Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference,
      (pp. 635­642). ACM.

[18] Clune, J., Beckmann, B. E., Ofria, C., & Pennock, R. T. (2009). Evolving
      coordinated quadruped gaits with the HyperNEAT generative encoding.
      In Proceedings of the IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation, (pp.
      2764­2771). IEEE.
[19] Clune, J., Goings, S., Punch, B., & Goodman, E. (2005). Investigations
      in meta-gas: panaceas or pipe dreams? In Proceedings of the Genetic and
      Evolutionary Computation Conference Workshops, (pp. 235­241). ACM.

[20] Clune, J., Goldsby, H. J., Ofria, C., & Pennock, R. T. (2011). Selective
      pressures for accurate altruism targeting: evidence from digital evolution
      for difficult-to-test aspects of inclusive fitness theory. Proceedings of the
      Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 278 (1706), 666­674.

[21] Clune, J., Misevic, D., Ofria, C., Lenski, R. E., Elena, S. F., & Sanjuán,
      R. (2008). Natural selection fails to optimize mutation rates for long-term
      adaptation on rugged fitness landscapes. PLoS Computational Biology,
      4 (9), e1000187.

[22] Clune, J., Mouret, J.-B., & Lipson, H. (2013). The evolutionary origins
      of modularity. Proceedings of the Royal Society B , 280 (1755), 20122863.

[23] Conrad, M. (1979). Bootstrapping on the adaptive landscape. BioSys-
      tems, 11 (2), 167­182.

[24] Corominas-Murtra, B., Goñi, J., Solé, R. V., & Rodríguez-Caso, C.
      (2013). On the origins of hierarchy in complex networks. Proceedings
      of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
      110 (33), 13316­13321.

[25] Cully, A., Clune, J., Tarapore, D., & Mouret, J.-B. (2015). Robots that
      can adapt like animals. Nature, 521 (7553), 503­507.

[26] D'Ambrosio, D. B., & Stanley, K. O. (2007). A novel generative encoding
      for exploiting neural network sensor and output geometry. In Proceedings
      of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, (pp. 974­981).
      ACM.

[27] Dawkins, M. S. (2007). Observing animal behaviour: design and analysis
      of quantitative data. Oxford University Press.

[28] Dawkins, R. (1989). The evolution of evolvability. Artificial Life, (pp.
      201­220).

[29] De Jong, K. A. (2006). Evolutionary computation: a unified approach.
      MIT press.

[30] Deb, K., Pratap, A., Agarwal, S., & Meyarivan, T. A. M. T. (2002). A
      fast and elitist multiobjective genetic algorithm: Nsga-ii. Evolutionary
      Computation, IEEE Transactions on, 6 (2), 182­197.

[31] Debat, V., & David, P. (2001). Mapping phenotypes: canalization, plas-
      ticity and developmental stability. Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 16 (10),
      555­561.
[32] deMenocal, P. B. (2004). African climate change and faunal evolution
      during the pliocene­pleistocene. Earth and Planetary Science Letters,
      220 (1-2), 3­24.

[33] Draghi, J., & Wagner, G. P. (2008). Evolution of evolvability in a devel-
      opmental model. Evolution, 62 (2), 301­315.

[34] Dykhuizen, D. E. (1990). Experimental studies of natural selection in
      bacteria. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics, 21 (1), 373­398.

[35] Eiben, A. E., & Smith, J. E. (2003). Introduction to evolutionary com-
      puting, vol. 53. Springer.

[36] Ellefsen, K. O., Lepikson, H. A., & Albiez, J. C. (2016). Planning inspec-
      tion paths through evolutionary multi-objective optimization. In Proceed-
      ings of the 2016 on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference,
      (pp. 893­900). ACM.

[37] Endler, J. A. (1986). Natural selection in the wild . Princeton University
      Press.

[38] Erwin, D. H. (2008). Macroevolution of ecosystem engineering, niche
      construction and diversity. Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 23 (6), 304­
      310.

[39] Espinosa-Soto, C., & Wagner, A. (2010). Specialization can drive the
      evolution of modularity. PLoS Computational Biology, 6 (3), e1000719.

[40] Filliat, D., Kodjabachian, J., & Meyer, J. A. (1999). Evolution of neural
      controllers for locomotion and obstacle avoidance in a six-legged robot.
      Connection Science, 11 (3), 225­242.

[41] Fish, J. L., Villmoare, B., Köbernick, K., Compagnucci, C., Britanova,
      O., Tarabykin, V., & Depew, M. J. (2011). Satb2, modularity, and the
      evolvability of the vertebrate jaw. Evolution & development, 13 (6), 549­
      564.

[42] Fortuna, M. A., Zaman, L., Wagner, A. P., & Ofria, C. (2013). Evolving
      digital ecological networks. PLoS Comput Biol , 9 (3), e1002928.

[43] Gallagher, J. C., Beer, R. D., Espenschied, K. S., & Quinn, R. D.
      (1996). Application of evolved locomotion controllers to a hexapod robot.
      Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 19 (1), 95­103.

[44] Gauci, J., & Stanley, K. O. (2007). Generating large-scale neural networks
      through discovering geometric regularities. In Proceedings of the Genetic
      and Evolutionary Computation Conference, (pp. 997­1004). ACM.

[45] Gerhart, J., & Kirschner, M. (2007). The theory of facilitated variation.
      Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104 (suppl 1), 8582­
      8589.
[46] Gould, S. J. (1977). Ontogeny and phylogeny. Harvard University Press.

[47] Grimbleby, J. B. (2000). Automatic analogue circuit synthesis using ge-
      netic algorithms. IEE Proceedings Circuits Devices and Systems, 147 (6),
      319­324.

[48] Hagmann, P., Cammoun, L., Gigandet, X., Meuli, R., Honey, C. J.,
      Wedeen, V. J., & Sporns, O. (2008). Mapping the structural core of
      human cerebral cortex. PLoS Biology, 6 (7), e159.

[49] Hamilton, W. D., Axelrod, R., & Tanese, R. (1990). Sexual reproduction
      as an adaptation to resist parasites (a review). Proceedings of the National
      Academy of Sciences, 87 (9), 3566­3573.

[50] Hendrikse, J. L., Parsons, T. E., & Hallgrímsson, B. (2007). Evolvability
      as the proper focus of evolutionary developmental biology. Evolution &
      development, 9 (4), 393­401.

[51] Hindré, T., Knibbe, C., Beslon, G., & Schneider, D. (2012). New insights
      into bacterial adaptation through in vivo and in silico experimental evo-
      lution. Nature Reviews Microbiology, 10 (5), 352­365.

[52] Huizinga, J., Clune, J., & Mouret, J.-B. (2014). Evolving neural networks
      that are both modular and regular: Hyperneat plus the connection cost
      technique. In Proceedings of the 2014 Annual Conference on Genetic and
      Evolutionary Computation, (pp. 697­704). ACM.

[53] Huizinga, J., Mouret, J.-B., & Clune, J. (2016). Does aligning phenotypic
      and genotypic modularity improve the evolution of neural networks? In
      Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference.
      ACM.

[54] Kamishima, T., Akaho, S., & Sakuma, J. (2011). Fairness-aware learning
      through regularization approach. In Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW),
      2011 IEEE 11th International Conference on, (pp. 643­650). IEEE.

[55] Kashtan, N., & Alon, U. (2005). Spontaneous evolution of modularity
      and network motifs. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
      102 (39), 13773­13778.

[56] Kashtan, N., Noor, E., & Alon, U. (2007). Varying environments can
      speed up evolution. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
      104 (34), 13711­13716.

[57] Kirschner, M., & Gerhart, J. (1998). Evolvability. Proceedings of the
      National Academy of Sciences, 95 (15), 8420­8427.

[58] Kirschner, M. W., Gerhart, J. C., & Norton, J. (2006). The plausibility
      of life: Resolving Darwin's dilemma. Yale University Press.
[59] Klingenberg, C. P. (2005). Developmental constraints, modules, and
      evolvability. Variation: A central concept in biology, (pp. 219­247).

[60] Kounios, L., Clune, J., Kouvaris, K., Wagner, G., Pavlicev, M., Weinre-
      ich, D., & Watson, R. (2017). Resolving the paradox of evolvability with
      learning theory: How evolution learns to improve evolvability on rugged
      fitness landscapes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. (un-
      der editorial review).

[61] Kouvaris, K., Clune, J., Kounios, L., Brede, M., & Watson, R. A. (2015).
      How evolution learns to generalise: Principles of under-fitting, over-fitting
      and induction in the evolution of developmental organisation. arXiv
      preprint arXiv:1508.06854 .

[62] Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., & Hinton, G. E. (2012). Imagenet classi-
      fication with deep convolutional neural networks. In Advances in neural
      information processing systems, (pp. 1097­1105).

[63] Kuo, P. D., Banzhaf, W., & Leier, A. (2006). Network topology and the
      evolution of dynamics in an artificial genetic regulatory network model
      created by whole genome duplication and divergence. Biosystems, 85 (3),
      177­200.

[64] Lee, I., Date, S. V., Adai, A. T., & Marcotte, E. M. (2004). A probabilistic
      functional network of yeast genes. science, 306 (5701), 1555­1558.

[65] Lee, S., Yosinski, J., Glette, K., Lipson, H., & Clune, J. (2013). Evolving
      gaits for physical robots with the hyperneat generative encoding: the
      benefits of simulation. In Applications of Evolutionary Computing, (pp.
      540­549). Springer.

[66] Lehman, J., Risi, S., & Stanley, K. O. (2012). On the benefits of divergent
      search for evolved representations. In Proceedings of the EvoNet 2012
      Workshop at ALIFE XIII .

[67] Lehman, J., & Stanley, K. O. (2008). Exploiting open-endedness to solve
      problems through the search for novelty. In Artificial Life XI: Proceedings
      of the Eleventh International Conference on the Simulation and Synthesis
      of Living Systems, (pp. 329­336). MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

[68] Lehman, J., & Stanley, K. O. (2011). Abandoning objectives: Evolution
      through the search for novelty alone. Evolutionary Computation, 19 (2),
      189­223.

[69] Lehman, J., Wilder, B., & Stanley, K. O. (2016). On the critical role of
      divergent selection in evolvability. Frontiers in Robotics and AI , 3 , 45.

[70] Leicht, E. A., & Newman, M. E. J. (2008). Community structure in
      directed networks. Physical review letters, 100 (11), 118703­118707.
[71] Lemos, B., Meiklejohn, C. D., Cáceres, M., & Hartl, D. L. (2005). Rates
      of divergence in gene expression profiles of primates, mice, and flies: sta-
      bilizing selection and variability among functional categories. Evolution,
      59 (1), 126­137.

[72] Lenski, R. E., & Mittler, J. E. (1993). The directed mutation controversy
      and neo-darwinism. Science, 259 (5092), 188­194.

[73] Lenski, R. E., Ofria, C., Collier, T. C., & Adami, C. (1999). Genome com-
      plexity, robustness and genetic interactions in digital organisms. Nature,
      400 (6745), 661­664.

[74] Lenski, R. E., Ofria, C., Pennock, R. T., & Adami, C. (2003). The
      evolutionary origin of complex features. Nature, 423 (6936), 139­144.

[75] Levin, B. R., & Bergstrom, C. T. (2000). Bacteria are different: observa-
      tions, interpretations, speculations, and opinions about the mechanisms
      of adaptive evolution in prokaryotes. Proceedings of the National Academy
      of Sciences, 97 (13), 6981­6985.

[76] Lipson, H., & Pollack, J. B. (2000). Automatic design and manufacture
      of robotic lifeforms. Nature, 406 (6799), 974­978.

[77] Livingston, N., Bernatskiy, A., Livingston, K., Smith, M., Schwarz, J.,
      Bongard, J., Wallach, D., & Long Jr, J. H. (2016). Modularity and spar-
      sity: Evolution of neural net controllers in physically embodied robots.
      Frontiers in Robotics and AI , 3 , 75.

[78] Lohn, J. D., Hornby, G. S., & Linden, D. S. (2005). An evolved an-
      tenna for deployment on nasa's space technology 5 mission. In Genetic
      Programming Theory and Practice II , (pp. 301­315). Springer.

[79] Lynch, M., Sung, W., Morris, K., Coffey, N., Landry, C. R., Dopman,
      E. B., Dickinson, W. J., Okamoto, K., Kulkarni, S., Hartl, D. L., et al.
      (2008). A genome-wide view of the spectrum of spontaneous mutations in
      yeast. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105 (27), 9272­
      9277.

[80] Maki, H. (2002). Origins of spontaneous mutations: specificity and direc-
      tionality of base-substitution, frameshift, and sequence-substitution mu-
      tageneses. Annual Review of Genetics, 36 (1), 279­303.

[81] Mengistu, H., Huizinga, J., Mouret, J.-B., & Clune, J. (2016). The evolu-
      tionary origins of hierarchy. PLoS Computional Biology, 12 (6), e1004829.

[82] Meunier, D., Lambiotte, R., Fornito, A., Ersche, K. D., & Bullmore,
      E. T. (2009). Hierarchical modularity in human brain functional networks.
      Frontiers in neuroinformatics, 3 , 37.
[83] Meyerson, E., Lehman, J., & Miikkulainen, R. (2016). Learning be-
      havior characterizations for novelty search. In Proceedings of the 2016
      GECCO conference companion on Genetic and evolutionary computation,
      (pp. 149­156). ACM.

[84] Misevic, D., Ofria, C., & Lenski, R. E. (2006). Sexual reproduction re-
      shapes the genetic architecture of digital organisms. Proceedings of the
      Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 273 (1585), 457­464.

[85] Mones, E., Vicsek, L., & Vicsek, T. (2012). Hierarchy measure for complex
      networks. PLoS One, 7 (3), e33799.

[86] Montanier, J.-M., & Bredeche, N. (2013). Evolution of altruism and
      spatial dispersion: an artificial evolutionary ecology approach. In Proc.
      of the European Conference on Artificial Life (ECAL 2013), (pp. 260­
      267). MIT Press.

[87] Mouret, J.-B., & Clune, J. (2015). Illuminating search spaces by mapping
      elites. arXiv preprint arXiv:1504.04909 .

[88] Newman, M. E. J. (2006). Modularity and community structure in net-
      works. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103 (23), 8577­
      8582.

[89] Nguyen, A., Yosinski, J., & Clune, J. (2015). Deep neural networks are
      easily fooled: High confidence predictions for unrecognizable images. In
      Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
      Recognition, (pp. 427­436).

[90] Nguyen, A. M., Yosinski, J., & Clune, J. (2015). Innovation engines: Au-
      tomated creativity and improved stochastic optimization via deep learn-
      ing. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Con-
      ference, (pp. 959­966). ACM.

[91] Odling-Smee, F. J., Laland, K. N., & Feldman, M. W. (2003). Niche
      construction: the neglected process in evolution. 37. Princeton University
      Press.

[92] Olson, E. N. (2006). Gene regulatory networks in the evolution and de-
      velopment of the heart. Science, 313 (5795), 1922­1927.

[93] Pallez, D., Collard, P., Baccino, T., & Dumercy, L. (2007). Eye-tracking
      evolutionary algorithm to minimize user fatigue in iec applied to inter-
      active one-max problem. In Proceedings of the 2007 GECCO conference
      companion on Genetic and evolutionary computation, (pp. 2883­2886).
      ACM.

[94] Palmer, M. E., & Chou, A. (2012). Evolved neural network controllers
      for physically simulated robots that hunt with an artificial visual cortex.
      Artificial Life, 13 , 415­422.
 [95] Paroo, Z., & Corey, D. R. (2004). Challenges for rnai in vivo. TRENDS
       in Biotechnology, 22 (8), 390­394.

 [96] Parter, M., Kashtan, N., & Alon, U. (2008). Facilitated variation: how
       evolution learns from past environments to generalize to new environ-
       ments. PLoS Computational Biology, 4 (11), e1000206.

 [97] Partridge, L., & Barton, N. H. (2000). Natural selection: evolving evolv-
       ability. Nature, 407 (6803), 457­458.

 [98] Pastor-Satorras, R., Smith, E., & Solé, R. V. (2003). Evolving protein
       interaction networks through gene duplication. Journal of Theoretical
       biology, 222 (2), 199­210.

 [99] Pearson, J. C., Lemons, D., & McGinnis, W. (2005). Modulating hox
       gene functions during animal body patterning. Nature Reviews Genetics,
       6 (12), 893­904.

[100] Peter, I. S., & Davidson, E. H. (2009). Modularity and design principles
       in the sea urchin embryo gene regulatory network. FEBS letters, 583 (24),
       3948­3958.

[101] Pigliucci, M. (2008). Is evolvability evolvable? Nature Reviews Genetics,
       9 (1), 75­82.

[102] Potts, R. (1998). Variability selection in hominid evolution. Evolutionary
       Anthropology: Issues, News, and Reviews, 7 (3), 81­96.

[103] Pugh, J. K., Soros, L. B., & Stanley, K. O. (2016). Quality diversity: A
       new frontier for evolutionary computation. Frontiers in Robotics and AI ,
       3 , 40.

[104] Ravasz, E., Somera, A. L., Mongru, D. A., Oltvai, Z. N., & Barabási, A. L.
       (2002). Hierarchical organization of modularity in metabolic networks.
       science, 297 (5586), 1551­1555.

[105] Rice, S. H. (1998). The evolution of canalization and the breaking of
       von baer's laws: modeling the evolution of development with epistasis.
       Evolution, 52 (3), 647­657.

[106] Secretan, J., Beato, N., D'Ambrosio, D., Rodriguez, A., Campbell, A.,
       Folsom-Kovarik, J., & Stanley, K. (2011). Picbreeder: A Case Study in
       Collaborative Evolutionary Exploration of Design Space. Evolutionary
       Computation, 19 (3), 373­403.

[107] Secretan, J., Beato, N., D'Ambrosio, D. B., Rodriguez, A., Campbell, A.,
       & Stanley, K. O. (2008). Picbreeder: evolving pictures collaboratively
       online. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
       Computing Systems, (pp. 1759­1768). ACM.
[108] Secretan, J., Beato, N., D'Ambrosio, D. B., Rodriguez, A., Campbell, A.,
       & Stanley, K. O. (2016). Picbreeder.org. [Online; accessed 16-June-2016].
       URL http://www.picbreeder.org/statistics.php

[109] Siegal, M. L., & Bergman, A. (2002). Waddington's canalization revis-
       ited: developmental stability and evolution. Proceedings of the National
       Academy of Sciences, 99 (16), 10528­10532.

[110] Sims, K. (1993). Interactive evolution of equations for procedural models.
       The Visual Computer , 9 (8), 466­476.

[111] Sporns, O., & Betzel, R. F. (2016). Modular brain networks. Annual
       review of psychology, 67 , 613­640.

[112] Stanley, K. O. (2007). Compositional pattern producing networks: A
       novel abstraction of development. Genetic Programming and Evolvable
       Machines, 8 (2), 131­162.

[113] Stanley, K. O. (2016). Art in the sciences of the artificial. Leonardo.

[114] Stanley, K. O., D'Ambrosio, D. B., & Gauci, J. (2009). A hypercube-
       based encoding for evolving large-scale neural networks. Artificial Life,
       15 (2), 185­212.

[115] Stanley, K. O., & Lehman, J. (2015). Why Greatness Cannot Be Planned:
       The Myth of the Objective. Springer International Publishing.

[116] Stanley, K. O., & Miikkulainen, R. (2002). Evolving neural networks
       through augmenting topologies. Evolutionary Computation, 10 (2), 99­
       127.

[117] Stanley, K. O., & Miikkulainen, R. (2003). A taxonomy for artificial
       embryogeny. Artificial Life, 9 (2), 93­130.

[118] Szegedy, C., Zaremba, W., Sutskever, I., Bruna, J., Erhan, D., Goodfel-
       low, I., & Fergus, R. (2013). Intriguing properties of neural networks.
       arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6199 .

[119] Szejka, A., & Drossel, B. (2007). Evolution of canalizing boolean net-
       works. The European Physical Journal B , 56 (4), 373­380.

[120] Tarapore, D., Clune, J., Cully, A., & Mouret, J.-B. (2016). How do differ-
       ent encodings influence the performance of the map-elites algorithm? In
       Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, (pp. 173­180). ACM.

[121] Turing, A. M. (1952). The chemical basis of morphogenesis. Philosoph-
       ical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences,
       237 (641), 37­72.

[122] Waddington, C. H. (1942). Canalization of development and the inheri-
       tance of acquired characters. Nature, 150 (3811), 563­565.
[123] Wagner, A. (1996). Does evolutionary plasticity evolve? Evolution, 50 (3),
       1008­1023.

[124] Wagner, G. P., & Altenberg, L. (1996). Complex adaptations and the
       evolution of evolvability. Evolution, 50 (3), 967­976.

[125] Wagner, G. P., Amemiya, C., & Ruddle, F. (2003). Hox cluster duplica-
       tions and the opportunity for evolutionary novelties. Proceedings of the
       National Academy of Sciences, 100 (25), 14603­14606.

[126] Wagner, G. P., Booth, G., & Bagheri-Chaichian, H. (1997). A population
       genetic theory of canalization. Evolution, 51 (2), 329­347.

[127] Wagner, G. P., Mezey, J., & Calabretta, R. (2005). Modularity: under-
       standing the development and evolution of natural complex systems, chap.
       Natural selection and the origin of modules. MIT press.

[128] Wagner, G. P., Pavlicev, M., & Cheverud, J. M. (2007). The road to
       modularity. Nature Reviews Genetics, 8 (12), 921­931.

[129] Watson, R. A., & Szathmáry, E. (2016). How can evolution learn? Trends
       in ecology & evolution, 31 (2), 147­157.

[130] Wemelsfelder, F., Hunter, T. E. A., Mendl, M. T., & Lawrence, A. B.
       (2001). Assessing the `whole animal': a free choice profiling approach.
       Animal Behaviour , 62 (2), 209­220.

[131] Wilke, C. O., Wang, J. L., Ofria, C., Lenski, R. E., & Adami, C. (2001).
       Evolution of digital organisms at high mutation rates leads to survival of
       the flattest. Nature, 412 (6844), 331­333.

[132] Willmore, K. E. (2012). The body plan concept and its centrality in
       evo-devo. Evolution: Education and Outreach, 5 (2), 219­230.

[133] Woolley, B. G., & Stanley, K. O. (2011). On the deleterious effects of a
       priori objectives on evolution and representation. In Proceedings of the
       Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, (pp. 957­964). ACM.

[134] Yosinski, J., Clune, J., Hidalgo, D., Nguyen, S., Zagal, J. C., & Lipson,
       H. (2011). Evolving robot gaits in hardware: the hyperneat generative
       encoding vs. parameter optimization. In Proceedings of the European
       Conference on Artificial Life, (pp. 890­897). MIT Press.

[135] Zaman, L., Devangam, S., & Ofria, C. (2011). Rapid host-parasite co-
       evolution drives the production and maintenance of diversity in digital
       organisms. In Proceedings of the 13th annual conference on Genetic and
       evolutionary computation, (pp. 219­226). ACM.
