                                        ON EVOLVABILITY AND BEHAVIOR LANDSCAPES IN
                                            NEUROEVOLUTIONARY DIVERGENT SEARCH

                                                                              A PREPRINT

arXiv:2306.09849v1 [cs.NE] 16 Jun 2023                Bruno Gasperov                                   Marko Ðurasevic´
                                           University of Zagreb, Faculty of                  University of Zagreb, Faculty of
                                        Electrical Engineering and Computing              Electrical Engineering and Computing

                                                     Zagreb, Croatia                                   Zagreb, Croatia
                                              bruno.gasperov@fer.hr                            marko.durasevic@fer.hr

                                                                                            ABSTRACT

                                                   Evolvability refers to the ability of an individual genotype (solution) to produce offspring with
                                                   mutually diverse phenotypes. Recent research has demonstrated that divergent search methods,
                                                   particularly novelty search, promote evolvability by implicitly creating selective pressure for it.
                                                  The main objective of this paper is to provide a novel perspective on the relationship between
                                                   neuroevolutionary divergent search and evolvability. In order to achieve this, several types of walks
                                                   from the literature on fitness landscape analysis are first adapted to this context. Subsequently, the
                                                   interplay between neuroevolutionary divergent search and evolvability under varying amounts of
                                                   evolutionary pressure and under different diversity metrics is investigated. To this end, experiments
                                                   are performed on Fetch Pick and Place, a robotic arm task. Moreover, the performed study in
                                                   particular sheds light on the structure of the genotype-phenotype mapping (the behavior landscape).
                                                   Finally, a novel definition of evolvability that takes into account the evolvability of offspring and is
                                                   appropriate for use with discretized behavior spaces is proposed, together with a Markov-chain-based
                                                   estimation method for it.

                                        Keywords neuroevolution, divergent search, novelty search, evolvability, genetic algorithms

                                        1 Introduction

                                        Recent years have seen a strong surge of interest in a number of evolutionary computation and population-based search
                                        approaches rooted in the ideas of divergent search and open-endedness [1]. When combined with neuroevolution,
                                        these approaches offer a promising alternative [2, 3] to more canonical gradient-based algorithms for training deep
                                        reinforcement learning agents, especially for tasks that include sparse or deceptive rewards, or require generation of a
                                        large number of high-performing yet behaviorally diverse solutions. Within this realm, the novelty search [4] and quality
                                        diversity [5] families of approaches have gained considerable attention in the research community. Novelty search
                                        is a class of divergent search algorithms based on abandoning objectives altogether and solely pursuing behavioral
                                        novelty instead. Novelty is typically evaluated by comparing the behavior of an individual to the behavior of the
                                        current population and a record of previously encountered individuals, known as the archive. On the other hand,
                                        quality-diversity approaches (as the name itself implies) consider both the objective quality of solutions and their
                                        diversity, aiming to discover a diverse set of high-performing solutions that occupy different niches, each of which
                                        represents a different type of behavior. As these algorithms "illuminate" the fitness potential of feature space areas, they
                                        are sometimes referred to as illumination algorithms [6]. The underlying thread of all divergent search algorithms is
                                        their emphasis on enabling the necessary conditions for open-ended processes to occur, which requires a high level of
                                        what is known as "evolvability".

                                        The concept of evolvability has been frequently studied, both in the area of natural evolution [7] and evolutionary
                                        computing [8, 9]. Despite the abundance of various, even somewhat conflicting definitions [10], we see evolvability as
                                        the capacity of an individual (genotype) to produce offspring with diverse phenotypes. Following this, evolvability can
                                        be considered an indicator of the individual's ability to exhaustively explore the solution space through its offspring.
On Evolvability and Behavior Landscapes in Neuroevolutionary Divergent Search A PREPRINT

While the importance of evolvability for divergent search can hardly be overstated, given that it increases the potential for
future evolution [11], this area of research remains relatively unexplored, especially in combination with neuroevolution.
It has been shown that novelty search in itself promotes evolvability [12] (measured via reachability and sampling
uniformity of the offspring) on both individual and population level [13], with some caveats1 [14, 15, 16]. Yet
novelty search boils down to greedily choosing the most diverse individuals within each generation without taking
into account their other characteristics, including evolvability itself, which might lead to less diversity in the long run.
Similar considerations have led researchers [11, 9] to propose algorithms that instead search directly for evolvability.
The successes of these approaches in generalizing well and producing higher evolvability even in unseen testing
environments, as well as in yielding solutions that can be quickly adapted for different tasks, are demonstrated. A
somewhat different path is taken by Katona et al. [17] who propose the Quality Evolvability Evolutionary Strategy. In
their work, a population of diverse and well-performing solutions is obtained indirectly - by finding a single individual
with such a distribution of offspring. In [13], the authors list several properties, characteristics, and mechanisms which
were demonstrated to be conducive to improving evolvability, including extinction events [18] and reduction of the cost
of connections between network nodes [19]. Ferigo et al. [20] first define evolvability as the mean difference in fitness
between the parents and their offspring, and then use a grid-like structure for studying the interplay between evolvability
and fitness. Their main findings suggest that evolvability is not an intrinsic property of the fitness landscape, but that it
rather heavily depends on the used evolutionary algorithm. Finally, we mention the newer work of Doncieux et al. [21]
who treat evolvability as reachability in the task space and provide a theoretical perspective on the underlying problem.

Our research lies at the intersection of (behavior) landscape analysis, neural network weight neuroevolution, and
evolvability research, exploring the strong links between the three topics. Following definitions from [13], we are
primarily concerned with individual evolvability, measured via a form of reachability, as opposed to population
evolvability [8, 12]. Furthermore, unlike the authors in [20], we study behavior for its own sake and do not rely on
any particular fitness function. We particularly explore the effect of the use of different diversity metrics and levels of
evolutionary pressure on evolvability in the context of neuroevolutionary divergent search.

The main contributions of this study are the following. First, we introduce a number of metrics related to evolvability
and behavior landscape analysis. Then we adapt the concept of walks from the existing literature on fitness landscape
analysis to the context of behavior landscape analysis. We also propose "dissimila", points with low evolvability that
play a role in novelty search that we suspect is similar to that of local optima in standard fitness-driven search. Second,
we propose a diversity metric based on the use of Gaussian kernel density estimates. Third, we study the sensitivity of
individual evolvability to the level of evolutionary pressure. By varying the level of evolutionary pressure present in
the environment, we aim to generalize existing research on the connections between novelty search and evolvability.
Positive links between evolvability and the level of evolutionary pressure present in the environment would provide
additional evidence on the significance of novelty search for promoting evolvability. Fourth, we investigate the effect
of different diversity metrics on evolvability, with a focus on the aforementioned kernel density estimation-based
metric. A suitable diversity metric is a key heuristic in a divergent search algorithm as it plays a vital role in assessing
the diversification of the solutions produced by the algorithm. Fifth and finally, we put forth a novel definition of
evolvability that also considers the evolvability of offspring and is suitable for use with discretized behavior spaces,
together with an associated Markov-chain-based estimation method.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces definitions and metrics which represent the prerequisites for
further work. In particular, concepts such as evolvability, sensitivity, and walks are expounded on in great detail, and
a number of diversity metrics are listed. Section 3 presents the experimental setup, including the task description,
operators, neural network architecture, and hyperparameters. In Section 4, the experimental results are presented.
Section 5 proposes a novel evolvability definition together with an associated estimation method. Finally, Section 6
concludes the paper by summarizing the findings and offering suggestions for future research in the field.

2 Definitions and metrics

2.1 Behavior function and descriptors

A behavior function  :   B is a mapping from genotypes (in neuroevolution represented by parameters of a neural

network) to phenotypes (behavior vectors):

                                            () = b,                                                                   (1)

where  is the set of genotypes, B is the behavior space (BS), i.e., the set of all behavior vectors (BVs),  is a genotype,
and b its phenotype. Typically, B  Rn with n  2. The components of a BV are referred to as behavior descriptors.

For example, a common choice of behavior descriptors in evolutionary robotics is given by the final position of the

1A distinction should be made between novelty search for neuroevolution of weights and neuroevolution of topologies.

                                            2
On Evolvability and Behavior Landscapes in Neuroevolutionary Divergent Search A PREPRINT

robot's body along two dimensions, i.e., b = (xT , yT ) where T is the terminal time. In some approaches (e.g., the
MAP-Elites algorithm [6]), the BS is split into niches - regions or subspaces containing solutions with similar behavior,
which can be obtained by simply discretizing the BS into a grid. As an alternative, centroidal Voronoi tessellation
[22], which ensures scalability to high-dimensional BSs, might be used. The use of niches gives rise to an alternative
categorical representation of BVs in the form of one-hot vectors b = (. . . , 1behavior in the niche i, . . .), with the i-th entry set
to 1 if the BV belongs to the i-th niche, and 0 otherwise. However, it is important to notice that this encoding discards
the original relationships between the niches and eliminates any naturally occurring distance metrics between them.

2.2 Behavior landscape

A behavior landscape is an abstraction that represents the genotype-behavior mapping, i.e., the function . We define it
analogously to the fitness landscape, which deals with genotype-fitness mapping and has been thoroughly studied in
various contexts, and the behavior-fitness mapping, considered widely in quality-diversity approaches. This triad of
mappings forms a bridge between classical evolutionary algorithms and new illumination-based approaches. Behavior
landscapes are intricate and complex structures influenced by a number of factors, such as the choice of the behavior
function, the topology of the (neural network) controller2, the interaction of the resulting controls with the environment,
and the environment's own internal mechanics. They are typically highly rugged, showing significant epistasis [23],
and more difficult to visualize than fitness landscapes [24], given the possible high dimensionality of the BS. A fitness
landscape is usually considered difficult if it has a large number of peaks and valleys (local optima) or if the paths to
global optima are not easy to traverse. In behavior landscape analysis, different criteria are required, and ruggedness is
not necessarily a hindrance, as it is closely related to diversity. A difficult behavior landscape could be seen as one
in which a divergent search algorithm struggles to explore the BS easily due to the presence of inaccessible regions.
Therefore, different topographical aspects (compared to classical fitness landscape analysis), such as the distribution of
different niches in the behavior landscape, should be scrutinized. On a related note, we remark that some studies suggest
that behaviorally diverse solutions lie concentrated in a small subset of the genotype space called the hypervolume3
[25, 26, 27].

It has also been noted [13] that, in the context of novelty search, the fitness function is dynamic and contingent upon the
set of individuals comprising the current population and archive. In contrast, the behavior landscape is static4, rendering
it less recalcitrant to analysis. Yet the research area remains mainly understudied with some notable exceptions [28],
while even the broader domain of neuroevolutionary fitness landscapes has received very limited scholarly attention
[29].

2.3 Local sensitivity

A behavior function  is said to be locally sensitive at  if small steps around it can lead to large changes in the ensuing
behavior. More formally, the local sensitivity of a behavior function  at    can be defined as:

                       LS() = max |() - ()|,           (2)
                                N ()

where N () is the set of all neighbours of , associated with a certain mutation operator M.  is a neighbor of  if
and only if  can be reached from  through a single mutation. This relation is not necessarily symmetric5. Large

LS() values point to the existence of neighbors that are significantly behaviorally different from  but say nothing
about their frequency. On the contrary, small LS() values indicate high levels of behavioral neutrality [30] locally
around . Note that, when training neural networks via neuroevolution, mutations are often given as random samples

from a multivariate (normal) distribution used for perturbing its weights, in which case N () = , rendering the notion

of the set of neighbors meaningless. However, this can be easily addressed by truncating the underlying distribution or
by otherwise enforcing genotypic proximity given by | - | < c, for some positive constant c. As previously hinted

at, Eq. 2 is sensitive to outliers due to the use of the max operator. A more robust alternative can be provided. First,
consider the sampling distribution over the set of neighbors N () induced by M and denote it by F. Now simply
define the expected local sensitivity as:

                       LS()  =         E |()  -  ()|.  (3)

                                F (N ())

    2A controller simply determines the mapping from the set of observations (states) to the set of actions, which can be represented

by a reinforcement learning agent.
    3In [25], the emphasis is put on elite hypervolumes in the sense of quality-diversity.
    4In stochastic environments, where behaviors are noisy, behavior descriptors (which are now random variables) can be replaced

by their expected values, thereby preserving the static nature of the behavior function.
    5E.g., consider removal of a neural network weight as a mutation operator.

                                3
                    On Evolvability and Behavior Landscapes in Neuroevolutionary Divergent Search A PREPRINT

Eq. 3 measures the expected distance between  and its randomly selected neighbor. It can be estimated by sampling

and taking the mean value:

                                LS()       =           1               |() - ()|,                      (4)
                                                 card(S ())
                                                                 S ()

where S()  N () is a sample from the set of neighbours of  and card(. . .) denotes cardinality.

2.4 Global sensitivity

The global sensitivity of  is defined as:

                                  GS          =        max      |()    -  ()|.                         (5)

                                                 , N ()

It is equal to the local sensitivity of the genotype  that has the largest local sensitivity. The expected global sensitivity
is defined in analogy to Eq. 3 but is not provided here for the sake of brevity.

2.5 Evolvability

Evolvability [13] can be conceptualized as a gauge of an individual's capacity to produce offspring with mutually
diverse phenotypes (in our case BVs). Although there is no consensus on its definition, we use the following one:

                                  ()             =  ,  max      |()    -  ()|,                         (6)

                                                       N ()

where () denotes the evolvability of solution . Hence, evolvability corresponds to the diameter of the cluster
comprising the neighbors of . The same caveats that apply to Eq. 2 apply here as well. By comparing Eq. 2 and Eq.

6 it is clear that, due to the triangle inequality, ()  2 LS(), and the two metrics are expected to be positively
correlated. Again, similarly to Eq. 3, the expected evolvability is a robust alternative given by:

                                 ()        =  ,          E              |()  -  ()|                    (7)

                                                 F (,        N ())

and its estimator:                                1
                                                 card(S ()
                         ()  =  card(S ())                   -  1)              |() - ()|.             (8)

                                                                    , S()

                                                                       = 

Under a one-hot representation of BVs, evolvability can be estimated relative to the sample size, as:

                                                 (; card(S()))         d
                                                                    =    ,                             (9)
                                                                       n

where n is the total number of niches, and d the number of niches occupied by solutions from the sample S().
Although our focus is on individual-level evolvability, we also present the following expression used to estimate the
expected population evolvability:

                             (i)  =          1         - 1)               |() - ()|,                   (10)
                                     ni+1(ni+1
                                                             ,   Gi+1

                                                                 =

where  (i) denotes the expected population evolvability of the i-th generation, Gi the set of all members of the i-th
evolutionary generation, and ni its cardinality. Finally, it is worth noting that evolvability is generally computationally
expensive, and in some cases, even prohibitively so, since it requires evaluating the fitness function (which can itself be

costly) on the whole N () or a sufficiently large sample of it.

2.6 Local "optima"

Consider the ratio of evolvability and local sensitivity:

                                                    r() = () ,                                         (11)
                                                           LS() + 

                                                             4
On Evolvability and Behavior Landscapes in Neuroevolutionary Divergent Search A PREPRINT

where protected division is employed (for some infinitesimal  > 0). It can be shown that 0  r() < 2. Also, consider

its probabilistic variant:

                                             r()  =      ()        .                                    (12)
                                                     LS() +       

These local metrics provide insight into the relationship between  and its neighbors. Solutions with relatively small
r() values are analogous to local optima in classical fitness landscapes - due to their large (in relative terms) expected

local sensitivity they are likely to be selected in NS-like algorithms, despite their low expected evolvability. Hence, we

suspect that they could represent points of deception and that their presence is expected to ramp up the difficulty of
the respective behavior landscape. We refer to such solutions as "dissimila", in analogy to "optima". On the contrary,
solutions with relatively large r() values represent highly evolvable points in the behavior landscape that might be

difficult to find because of their relatively low expected local sensitivity, i.e. their relative similarity to their neighbors.

2.7 Walks

A walk [31] W on a behavior landscape is a sequence (time series) of behavior vectors (b0, . . . , bi, . . . , bT), associated
with a sequence of genotypes, (0, . . . , i, . . . , T ), via the relation bi = (i). The underlying sequence of genotypes
is generated by some process A (e.g. an evolutionary algorithm), i.e., A(i) = i+1. This ensures that actual segments
of the search space traversed by the respective (novelty search) algorithm are considered [29]. Solution i+1 is
called the child of i, and conversely, i is referred to as the parent of i+1. Unless stated otherwise, real-valued
(non-categorical) BVs are assumed. Also, all walks are assumed to be of finite length T + 1. We highlight that walks are
particularly well-suited to evolvability analysis, as they involve a single parent generating a large number of offspring
(neighbors) during each step.

2.7.1 Highly selective walk

In a highly selective walk, the best (according to some criterion) solution from S(i) is chosen, i.e.:

                             A(i) = i+1 = argmaxG(()),                                                  (13)

                                                      S (i )

where G is a (novelty-based) fitness metric and S(i)  N (i) is defined as earlier. This type of walk represents

situations in which there is a large amount of evolutionary pressure. If niches are considered, an alternative definition is

possible, given by:          A(i) = i+1 = argmax G(()),

                                                                                                        (14)

                                                      S (i )

                                                  N (())=N ((i))

where N (()) denotes the niche to which () belongs. Hence, among solutions that fall into a dif-
ferent niche than i, the best one is accepted. The corresponding walk through niches is given by:
(N ((0)), . . . , N ((i)), . . . , N ((T ))).

2.7.2 Adaptive walk

In an adaptive walk, any solution "better" than i is accepted. It is an intermediate type of walk between a highly
selective and a random walk. Consider first the subset of children of i, given by Ca = {  S(i) | G(()  a} for
some a which is a proxy for evolutionary pressure. Depending on the model, a can be constant or change dynamically

in time. Now simply:

                                             i+1  Unif(Ca),                                             (15)

where Unif denotes the uniform distribution. Hence, unlike the case with highly selective walks, a random solution that

surpasses a certain threshold is selected instead. If no such solution exists, set i+1 = i and sample from S(i+1)

again. Let us also consider adaptive walks when using BVs expressed as one-hot vectors. In that case, consider the
subset Ca = {  S(i) | N (()) = N ((i))} and sample uniformly from it to obtain i+1. Similarly as before,
if Ca is an empty set, let i+1 = i. We emphasize that a highly selective walk can also be considered adaptive, with a
selected in such a way that card(Ca) = 1. Finally, we raise attention to the connections between biological evolution

by natural selection and the concept of adaptive walks [32, 33].

2.7.3 Random walk

In a random walk, any neighbor is accepted:

                                             i+1  Unif(S(i)).                                           (16)

It describes the conditions under which there is no evolutionary pressure altogether.

                                                     5
On Evolvability and Behavior Landscapes in Neuroevolutionary Divergent Search A PREPRINT

2.7.4 Multi-state walk

In a multi-state walk, at each step i, a set of genotypes is selected, resulting in a matrix Zi filled with BVs. For the sake
of simplicity, in what follows the focus is solely on single-state walks. By doing this we abstract the key aspects of
divergent search, stripping it to its barest minimum and focusing on the evolvability of individuals.

2.8 Diversity metrics
There are various options available when selecting the diversity metric G. Here we list and propose several:

2.8.1 K-nearest neighbors distance to other individuals in the population and the archive

This case corresponds to the vanilla novelty search algorithm [4]:

                                      G(()) =                       |µk() - ()|                               (17)

                                                          1kK

where µk() is the phenotype of the k-th nearest (in the BS) individual to , with µk() = (),   S(i)  X .
X is the archive of previous novel (or randomly selected) individuals. The Euclidean distance is typically used.

2.8.2 Distance to ancestors

If the distance to the parent is used as a metric, we have:

                                      G(()) = |(i) - ()|.                                                     (18)

Observe the similarity to Eq. 2; if S(i) = N (i), the distance between consecutive BVs in the respective walk is
maximum and equal to the local sensitivity at . Alternatively, it is possible to consider not only i but also the entire
chain of ancestors, which then acts as a simplified archive. More formally:

                                      G(()) =                       |(j) - ()|.                               (19)

                                                          0ji

The Markovian property no longer holds with Eq. 19.

2.8.3 Gaussian kernel density estimation-based metric.

Finally, it is possible to set:

                                 G(()) = 1                    -KH (() - ()) (),                               (20)
                                                card(Y )
                                                           Y

where Y = (S(i)  X ) \ {}, KH is the Gaussian kernel, H is the bandwidth6 matrix and the rest of the notation is
the same as before. The Gaussian kernel is given by:

                                      KH(x)  =  (2        )-d/2  |H|-1/2  e-  1  , xT H-1 x                   (21)
                                                                              2

with d denoting the number of dimensions. The idea is to select solutions that are located remotely from the areas
already explored. However, since visiting previously seen regions (i.e., backtracking) can even be beneficial [28], we
introduce a discount function  that ensures that recently explored regions are avoided more strongly than those visited
long ago, as well as use an archive with a finite size. In the context of biological evolution, this approach could resemble
a group of individuals searching for food while avoiding areas depleted of resources by previous inhabitants, in an
environment that slowly replenishes resources over time. Note that by using such a metric, the archive is implicitly
contained in the shape of the kernel density estimate, which plays the role of a memory container. Also, observe that
the choice of the matrix H is a subtle one, as it determines the amount of smoothing applied to the density estimate,
with small (large) bandwidths resulting in more peaked (smoother) estimates.

6Also known as the smoothing matrix.

                                                                 6
                     On Evolvability and Behavior Landscapes in Neuroevolutionary Divergent Search A PREPRINT

Figure 1: Visualization of the Fetch "Pick and Place" environment rendered in observable mode. A robotic arm is
shown moving around the table, about to grab the block.

3 Experimental setup

Experiments on an evolutionary robotics task are conducted to examine the effect of evolutionary pressure and the
use of different diversity metrics on evolvability. Although the used environment in its original form includes an
explicit goal, e.g. moving a block to a target location, our study focuses solely on the diversity of learned behaviors and
disregards any other goals. The experiments are implemented using Gymnasium [34], an open-source Python library
for reinforcement learning, and its associated collection of environments, Gymnasium Robotics. Parallel processing
is achieved with Ray, a toolkit for scaling Python applications to clusters. The environment used for the experiments is
illustrated in Fig. 1.

3.1 Task description
The experiments are performed on a toy episodic reinforcement learning task provided within the Fetch "Pick and
Place" environment [35]. The environment is based on the Fetch Mobile Manipulator, a seven-degree-of-freedom
robotic arm equipped with a two-fingered parallel gripper as its end-effector, which can be either closed or open. The
robot is controlled by moving the gripper in a Cartesian space. In the original task, the goal is to use the manipulator to
pick up and move a block from an initial position to a target position. The block is initially located on a table, while the
target position can either be on the table or in mid-air. In the task formulation with rewards, a positive reward is given
upon completing the goal (if using a sparse reward formulation) or moving the block closer (if using a dense reward
formulation) to the target position. The manipulator is controlled at a frequency of f = 25 Hz and each simulation
time-step has a duration of dt = 0.002 s. The observation space consists of 25 variables, including the current positions,
displacements, rotations, and velocities of various parts of the end-effector and the block. Kinematic information is
provided through Mujoco [36] bodies attached to both the block and the end-effector. The action space consists of four
variables: Cartesian displacements dx, dy, and dz of the end-effector, and one variable controlling the closing and
opening of the gripper. The episode is truncated when its duration reaches the maximum number of steps, which is set
to 50 by default. The determinism of the environment is ensured by fixing the initial conditions, more specifically, the
initial and the target position of the block.

3.2 Behavior space and descriptors
In the considered environment, the BS is two-dimensional and the BVs are given by b = (xT , yT ) where xT (yT )
denotes the final position of the block in the x (y) axis direction.

3.3 Neural network controllers
A fully-connected feed-forward neural network architecture was used for the experiments. The first layer consists of
25 input neurons that encode the state (observation) space features. It is followed by two hidden layers, each with
32 neurons. The output layer contains only 4 neurons (the same as the cardinality of the action space) which are
responsible for controlling the robotic manipulator. The rectified linear unit (ReLU) activation function was used in all

                                                                      7
On Evolvability and Behavior Landscapes in Neuroevolutionary Divergent Search A PREPRINT

Table 1: Hyperparameter values

             Hyperparameter             Value

   Num. of offspring per generation     30
          Smoothing parameter           0.5
             Archive size limit         1200
                                        50
Num. of walks (runs) per configuration  15
      Num. of nearest neighbors k

places, with the exception of the output layer, where the hyperbolic tangent (tanh) activation function was employed to
ensure that the actions produced by the network are within the [-1, 1] range, as required by the used reinforcement
learning environment. The choice of the neural network architecture was guided partly by prior works that showed the
effectiveness of relatively shallow designs (with only 2 hidden layers) on various reinforcement learning tasks with
low-dimensional state spaces [37], and partly by our initial experimentation. The resulting policies are deterministic in
the sense that states are mapped to specific actions as opposed to probability distributions over the action space. The
Xavier normal7 initialization was used for the weights, while the biases were initialized to a constant value of 0. The
topology of the neural network remains constant, and only the weights are updated during the search.

3.4 Variation operator

The choice of mutation operator is pivotal as it defines the set of neighbors and the probability distribution over it,
thereby affecting the search through the behavior landscape. We use the standard Cauchy distribution (also known as
the Student's t-distribution with a single degree of freedom) to perturb the weights of the employed neural network. For
simplicity, the crossover is not utilized in our experiments. This choice was partly inspired by recent work in which an
evolutionary algorithm based on the use of Cauchy deviates (simple Cauchy mutations) was shown to have favorable
convergence properties [38], although this was done outside of the context of neuroevolution. It should be noted that,
due to the distribution's leptokurtosis, the use of Cauchy-based mutations tends to frequently cause small changes to the
respective genotype, and occasionally large ones.

3.5 Hyperparameters

The size of the archive is limited, and new solutions are randomly added to it with a probability of P = 10%. The
values for the remaining hyperparameters can be found in Table 1 and in the captions of the respective figures. The
selection of certain hyperparameters, such as the number of walks (run) or the walk length, was made in such a way as to
ensure that the simulations were manageable within the budget of our available computational resources. Additionally,
the parameter a (required for generating adaptive walks) is set dynamically such that in each generation, the top x% of
individuals pass the threshold.

4 Results

4.1 Evolutionary pressure

We start by analyzing the effect of evolutionary pressure on evolvability. Fig. 2 shows the mean evolvability under a
fixed number of runs as a function of the walk step number, for walks with different levels of evolutionary pressure. The
number of walk steps is set to 50. Since highly selective walks instigate evolvability, adaptive walks employing novelty
as a criterion are also expected to do this, albeit to a smaller degree. The parameter (given in parentheses) specifies the
fraction of the best children that comprise the set from which the next parent is randomly picked. Thus, higher values
indicate lower degrees of evolutionary pressure. Extremes are represented by the highly selective walk, in which the
best single child is always selected, and the random walk (in essence a random search in the genotype space) in which
any child is chosen. Observe that, after starting from approximately the same mean evolvability value, the trajectories
spread out in a manner that suggests a positive correlation between evolvability and the level of evolutionary pressure.
We use evolvabilities at the end of the walk (step 50) and the corresponding levels of evolutionary pressure to determine
the Spearman rank-order correlation coefficient r, which is a measure of the monotonicity of the relationship between
two variables. The obtained correlation coefficient equals r = 0.7106 (p < 10-46), demonstrating a strong positive

    7Weights are sampled from a normal distribution with mean 0 and variance inversely proportional to the sum of the number of
inputs and outputs to the layer.

                                                                      8
                     On Evolvability and Behavior Landscapes in Neuroevolutionary Divergent Search A PREPRINT

Figure 2: Comparison of mean evolvability for selective (sel.), adaptive (ad.), and random walks on the behavior
landscape of the Fetch Pick and Place environment. The figure displays the means and 95% confidence intervals for a
fixed number of task runs.

correlation. Also note that, while the random walk trajectory leads to a clear degradation of evolvability over time,
even modest amounts of evolutionary pressure are sufficient to preserve (or even enhance) it for all of the considered
trajectories. In summary, the obtained results are in accordance with recent findings on novelty search promoting
evolvability [13] and also offer additional perspective on the relationship between evolvability and evolutionary pressure.
We also leave for further work the following question: Is it possible to devise neural network initialization schemes that
lead to high levels of evolvability at the very beginning, introducing one-shot evolvability and facilitating the ensuing
search process? This is hoped to lead to even faster evolvability gains.

4.2 Different metrics

In this Subsection, we analyze the effect of different diversity metrics on evolvability. Fig. 3 shows the results on
the Fetch "Pick and Place" environment, with the number of walk steps set to 50. We emphasize that the distance to
ancestors metric takes into account the whole chain of ancestors, up until the very beginning of the walk. As seen in
the figure, the metric based on Gaussian kernel density estimation seems to dominate over the alternatives, while the
k-nearest neighbors without the archive variant yields the lowest evolvability values. To corroborate this observation
statistically, consider first the sets of evolvability values at walk step 100 associated with each of the evaluated metrics.
To this end, we turn to the non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis H-test, which does not require the assumption of normality,
while its other assumptions (independence of samples, random sampling, ordinal or continuous dependent variable) are
met. It is then used to test the null hypothesis that the population medians of all of the considered sets are equal. The
obtained p-value equals p = 0.01943, rejecting the null hypothesis at  = 0.05 significance level. The Conover's test
is used as a post-hoc test to make pairwise comparisons, with the choice of the Holm method for adjusting p-values.
The p-values comparing the Gaussian kernel density estimates to (a) the KNN method, (b) KNN without an archive,
and (c) the distance to ancestors-based metric are, in order: 0.053031, 0.052218, and 0.040418. All the other p-values
are equal to 1. Hence, given the  = 0.05 significance level, we cannot conclude that there is a significant difference
between the mean ranks of these groups, except for the Gaussian kernel density estimates/distance to ancestors pair.
Nevertheless, the results do indicate that the use of the Gaussian kernel density estimate-based metric provides a
competitive, if not superior, alternative that could be added to the arsenal of existing metrics. An important difference
between the Gaussian kernel density estimate-based metric and the one based on KNN with Euclidean distance should
be highlighted. Consider, for example, points A and B in a BS and the line connecting them. KNN with Euclidean
distance (assuming k = 2) would be indifferent between the points on the line, which represents a contour line in the
corresponding contour graph. In contrast, a Gaussian kernel density estimate-based metric would favor the mid-point.

                                                                      9
On Evolvability and Behavior Landscapes in Neuroevolutionary Divergent Search A PREPRINT

Figure 3: Comparison of different metrics on the behavior landscape of the Fetch Pick and Place environment. Means
and confidence intervals (95%) are shown for a fixed number of runs on the task. The  discount factor associated with
the Gaussian kernel density-based metric is simply set to 1.

While the results are so far limited to a single reinforcement learning environment, further work should test generalization
across multiple environments. Finally, keep in mind that highly selective walks represent a very simplified version
of novelty search with only a single parent in each generation. Consequently, it is possible and even likely that the
presented results underestimate the evolvability levels that would appear in a fully-fledged novelty search algorithm.

5 More on evolvability

5.1 Towards better evolvability definitions

It has been observed, already in the original MAP-Elites paper [6], that most solutions are positioned in the BS relatively
close to their parents [6]. Donciex et al. [13] measure evolvability by estimating reachability (with a simple ratio) and
uniformity separately (by using the Jensen-Shannon distance). The authors emphasize that separating the two aspects
facilitates interpretation and prevents informational overlap, as the same Jensen-Shannon Distance (JSD) can result
from sets of points with varying coverage. While valuable, we argue that this separation alone does not deal with the
central problem because two sets of points with identical coverage and JSD can greatly vary in terms of their actual
evolvability. More specifically, the ensuing definition is highly myopic in the sense that it does not take into account
the evolvability of the offspring themselves. To illustrate this, consider from example solutions A and B, each with
two children, belonging to niches 1 and 2, and 3 and 4, respectively. A and B clearly have the same coverage and JSD.
However, if solutions from niches 3 and 4 are more likely to generate offspring belonging to other niches than solutions
from niches 1 and 2, it could be argued that B should be considered more evolvable. Furthermore, the evolvability of
the visited niches should also be accounted for, some of which might serve as "wormholes", generating offspring in
remote or hardly reachable regions of the BS. Therefore, evolvability metrics should consider not only the coverage and
uniformity but also the very structure of the behavior landscape, i.e. the mutual reachability of different niches (regions)
in it and the very structure of the genotype-phenotype mapping. With this goal in mind, we suggest the following
criterion, which presents a generalization, applicable when the BS is split into niches:
Evolvability in discretized BSs: A solution  is said to be more l-evolvable than solution  if and only if:

                        E(card(Dl,U )) > E(card(Dl,U )),                                                    (22)

where card(Dl, U ) denotes the cardinality of the set of all niches visited at least once by descendants of  up to their
l-th generation, assuming a total of U descendants. The parameter l captures the level of long-sightedness, with l = 1

corresponding to the simple coverage of the children, as introduced in [13]. In non-discretized BSs, the number of

visited niches could be replaced, for example, by the hypervolume of the convex hull spanned by the descendants. In

what follows, we lay out a procedure for estimating the evolvability of solution  under such a definition:

                                             10
                     On Evolvability and Behavior Landscapes in Neuroevolutionary Divergent Search A PREPRINT

       1. Use a grid to split the BS into niches

       2. Generate the offspring of  and calculate their discrete distribution D over the set of all niches

       3. Use MAP-Elites [6] or other NS-like algorithm to estimate the probability matrix T = (ti,j), where ti,j is the
           probability of solution in niche i generating a child in niche j

       4. Construct a Markov chain with T as its transition matrix, the set of niches as its state space, and D as its initial
           distribution

       5. Perform U random walks of length l + 1 on the constructed Markov chain and obtain the discrete distribution
           D of the visited niches over the set of all niches, cumulatively for all U walks

       6. Apply an evolvability metric to D, i.e. coverage (in accordance with Expression 22)

       7. Repeat steps (5) and (6) multiple times, and use the mean to approximate the evolvability of 

Additionally, it is possible to define the evolvability of niche i by using the appropriate initial distribution (i.e. a one-hot
vector) as D. We remark on several aspects. Firstly, selecting the correct number of niches (i.e. the grid size) in the
first step is a delicate matter, as having too few niches could result in the matrix T with mostly close-to-zero values in
all its non-diagonal entries, while having too many can lead to a large number of unvisited niches. Secondly, note the
similarity with the curiosity score [39, 40] used in quality-diversity approaches. The shortcoming of the method (in the
presented form) lies in the fact that it can only be used a posteriori, i.e. after the entire BS has already been explored.
Despite this limitation, it provides a useful tool for better exploring the structure of the behavior landscape, primarily
through the estimation of the transition matrix T . Also, by evaluating T in an online fashion, it could also be integrated
with other methods that search directly for evolvability [11].

6 Conclusion and further work

This paper explores evolvability in neuroevolutionary divergent search from the perspective of a behavior landscape
analysis. In particular, the results confirm the positive correlation between evolvability and the amount of evolutionary
pressure present in the environment. Moreover, they indicate that the use of Gaussian kernel density estimate-based
metrics should be added to the arsenal of existing diversity metrics in the context of evolvability promotion. Finally, a
new definition of evolvability, that considers the offsprings' evolvability as well and takes into account the very structure
of the behavior landscape, is proposed, along with a method for its estimation.

As part of further work, generalization to a wider range of environments should be studied, along with the use
of alternative operators and behavior space descriptors. The relationship between the newly proposed definition of
evolvability and the curiosity score should also be experimentally studied. Another possible path forward is to investigate
the links between the evolvability of neural network controllers and their sensitivity to initial conditions in stochastic
(noisy) reinforcement learning environments, i.e., a form of Lyapunov stability [41]. More specifically, the phenotypic
sensitivity to environmental noise (with a fixed genotype) could be used as a behavior (meta)-descriptor. Further ideas
rely on the direct evolvability search [11] and lead it into new directions. One idea would be to take it a step further and
consider direct meta-evolvability search: instead of optimizing for evolvability, optimize for the potential for evolvability.
Another possible avenue is to encode the parameters of the mutation operator's distribution into the genotype, thereby
also performing a search through the space of heuristics. More generally, the use of hyperheuristics such as genetic
programming might help uncover heuristics with the capacity to further enhance evolvability. Further studies could also
test the use of Gaussian kernel density estimate-based distance metrics in the context of population-level evolvability
[12]. Finally, the effects of optimization with conflicting objectives [42] on evolvability could also be considered.

References

 [1] Kenneth O Stanley. Why open-endedness matters. Artificial life, 25(3):232­235, 2019.

 [2] Felipe Petroski Such, Vashisht Madhavan, Edoardo Conti, Joel Lehman, Kenneth O Stanley, and Jeff Clune.
      Deep neuroevolution: Genetic algorithms are a competitive alternative for training deep neural networks for
      reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.06567, 2017.

 [3] Tim Salimans, Jonathan Ho, Xi Chen, Szymon Sidor, and Ilya Sutskever. Evolution strategies as a scalable
      alternative to reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.03864, 2017.

 [4] Joel Lehman and Kenneth O Stanley. Novelty search and the problem with objectives. Genetic programming
      theory and practice IX, pages 37­56, 2011.

                                                                     11
                     On Evolvability and Behavior Landscapes in Neuroevolutionary Divergent Search A PREPRINT

 [5] Justin K Pugh, Lisa B Soros, and Kenneth O Stanley. Quality diversity: A new frontier for evolutionary
      computation. Frontiers in Robotics and AI, page 40, 2016.

 [6] Jean-Baptiste Mouret and Jeff Clune. Illuminating search spaces by mapping elites. arXiv preprint
      arXiv:1504.04909, 2015.

 [7] Richard Dawkins. The evolution of evolvability. In Artificial life, pages 201­220. Routledge, 2019.

 [8] Bryan Wilder and Kenneth Stanley. Reconciling explanations for the evolution of evolvability. Adaptive Behavior,
      23(3):171­179, 2015.

 [9] Alexander Gajewski, Jeff Clune, Kenneth O Stanley, and Joel Lehman. Evolvability es: scalable and direct
      optimization of evolvability. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, pages
      107­115, 2019.

[10] Massimo Pigliucci. Is evolvability evolvable? Nature Reviews Genetics, 9(1):75­82, 2008.

[11] Henok Mengistu, Joel Lehman, and Jeff Clune. Evolvability search: directly selecting for evolvability in order
      to study and produce it. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference 2016, pages
      141­148, 2016.

[12] Joel Lehman, Bryan Wilder, and Kenneth O Stanley. On the critical role of divergent selection in evolvability.
      Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 3:45, 2016.

[13] Stephane Doncieux, Giuseppe Paolo, Alban Laflaquière, and Alexandre Coninx. Novelty search makes evolvability
      inevitable. In Proceedings of the 2020 Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, pages 85­93, 2020.

[14] Joel Lehman and Kenneth O Stanley. Improving evolvability through novelty search and self-adaptation. In 2011
      IEEE congress of evolutionary computation (CEC), pages 2693­2700. IEEE, 2011.

[15] Giuseppe Cuccu, Faustino J Gomez, et al. When novelty is not enough. In EvoApplications (1), pages 234­243,
      2011.

[16] David Shorten and Geoff Nitschke. How evolvable is novelty search? In 2014 IEEE International Conference on
      Evolvable Systems, pages 125­132. IEEE, 2014.

[17] Adam Katona, Daniel W Franks, and James Alfred Walker. Quality evolvability es: Evolving individuals with a
      distribution of well performing and diverse offspring. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.10790, 2021.

[18] Joel Lehman and Risto Miikkulainen. Extinction events can accelerate evolution. PloS one, 10(8):e0132886,
      2015.

[19] Jeff Clune, Jean-Baptiste Mouret, and Hod Lipson. The evolutionary origins of modularity. Proceedings of the
      Royal Society b: Biological sciences, 280(1755):20122863, 2013.

[20] Andrea Ferigo, LB Soros, Eric Medvet, Giovanni Iacca, et al. On the entanglement between evolvability and
      fitness: an experimental study on voxel-based soft robots. In ALIFE: PROCEEDINGS OF THE ARTIFICIAL
      LIFE CONFERENCE. MIT press, 2022.

[21] Stephane Doncieux, Alban Laflaquière, and Alexandre Coninx. Novelty search: a theoretical perspective. In
      Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, pages 99­106, 2019.

[22] Vassilis Vassiliades, Konstantinos Chatzilygeroudis, and Jean-Baptiste Mouret. Using centroidal voronoi tessella-
      tions to scale up the multidimensional archive of phenotypic elites algorithm. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary
      Computation, 22(4):623­630, 2017.

[23] Yuval Davidor. Epistasis variance: A viewpoint on ga-hardness. In Foundations of genetic algorithms, volume 1,
      pages 23­35. Elsevier, 1991.

[24] Erik Pitzer and Michael Affenzeller. A comprehensive survey on fitness landscape analysis. Recent advances in
      intelligent engineering systems, pages 161­191, 2012.

[25] Vassiiis Vassiliades and Jean-Baptiste Mouret. Discovering the elite hypervolume by leveraging interspecies
      correlation. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, pages 149­156, 2018.

[26] Nemanja Rakicevic, Antoine Cully, and Petar Kormushev. Policy manifold search: Exploring the manifold
      hypothesis for diversity-based neuroevolution. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation
      Conference, pages 901­909, 2021.

[27] Adam Gaier, Alexander Asteroth, and Jean-Baptiste Mouret. Discovering representations for black-box op-
      timization. In Proceedings of the 2020 Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, pages 103­111,
      2020.

                                                                     12
                     On Evolvability and Behavior Landscapes in Neuroevolutionary Divergent Search A PREPRINT

[28] Achkan Salehi, Alexandre Coninx, and Stephane Doncieux. Geodesics, non-linearities and the archive of novelty
      search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.03162, 2022.

[29] Nuno M Rodrigues, Sara Silva, and Leonardo Vanneschi. A study of fitness landscapes for neuroevolution. In
      2020 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC), pages 1­8. IEEE, 2020.

[30] Edgar Galván and Peter Mooney. Neuroevolution in deep neural networks: Current trends and future challenges.
      IEEE Transactions on Artificial Intelligence, 2(6):476­493, 2021.

[31] Peter F Stadler. Fitness landscapes. In Biological evolution and statistical physics, pages 183­204. Springer, 2002.
[32] John H Gillespie. Molecular evolution over the mutational landscape. Evolution, pages 1116­1129, 1984.
[33] Stuart Kauffman and Simon Levin. Towards a general theory of adaptive walks on rugged landscapes. Journal of

      theoretical Biology, 128(1):11­45, 1987.
[34] Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and Wojciech

      Zaremba. Openai gym, 2016.
[35] Matthias Plappert, Marcin Andrychowicz, Alex Ray, Bob McGrew, Bowen Baker, Glenn Powell, Jonas Schneider,

      Josh Tobin, Maciek Chociej, Peter Welinder, Vikash Kumar, and Wojciech Zaremba. Multi-goal reinforcement
      learning: Challenging robotics environments and request for research, 2018.
[36] Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control. In 2012
      IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems, pages 5026­5033. IEEE, 2012.
[37] Mateusz Kurek and Wojciech Jas´kowski. Heterogeneous team deep q-learning in low-dimensional multi-agent
      environments. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computational Intelligence and Games (CIG), pages 1­8. IEEE,
      2016.
[38] Drazen Bajer, Goran Martinovic´, and Janez Brest. A population initialization method for evolutionary algorithms
      based on clustering and cauchy deviates. Expert Systems with Applications, 60:294­310, 2016.
[39] Antoine Cully and Yiannis Demiris. Quality and diversity optimization: A unifying modular framework. IEEE
      Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 22(2):245­259, 2017.
[40] Daniele Gravina, Antonios Liapis, and Georgios N Yannakakis. Quality diversity through surprise. IEEE
      Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 23(4):603­616, 2018.
[41] Theodore J Perkins and Andrew G Barto. Lyapunov design for safe reinforcement learning. Journal of Machine
      Learning Research, 3(Dec):803­832, 2002.
[42] Davy Smith, Laurissa Tokarchuk, and Geraint Wiggins. Exploring conflicting objectives with madns: Multiple
      assessment directed novelty search. In Proceedings of the 2016 on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation
      Conference Companion, pages 23­24, 2016.

                                                                     13
