arXiv:1505.06353v1 [cs.NE] 23 May 2015               The evolutionary origins of hierarchy

                                        Henok Mengistu, University of Wyoming
                                        Joost Huizinga, University of Wyoming
                                        Jean-Baptiste Mouret, Inria, Villers-l`es-Nancy, F-54600, France
                                        Jeff Clune, University of Wyoming

                                        Abstract

                                              Hierarchical organization ­ the recursive composition of sub-modules ­ is ubiquitous in biological networks,
                                              including neural, metabolic, ecological, and genetic regulatory networks, and in human-made systems, such
                                              as large organizations and the Internet. To date, most research on hierarchy in networks has been limited to
                                              quantifying this property. However, an open, important question in evolutionary biology is why hierarchical
                                              organization evolves in the first place. It has recently been shown that modularity evolves because of the
                                              presence of a cost for network connections. Here we investigate whether such connection costs also tend
                                              to cause a hierarchical organization of such modules. In computational simulations, we find that networks
                                              without a connection cost do not evolve to be hierarchical, even when the task has a hierarchical structure.
                                              However, with a connection cost, networks evolve to be both modular and hierarchical, and these networks
                                              exhibit higher overall performance and evolvability (i.e. faster adaptation to new environments). Additional
                                              analyses confirm that hierarchy independently improves adaptability after controlling for modularity. Overall,
                                              our results suggest that the same force­the cost of connections­promotes the evolution of both hierarchy and
                                              modularity, and that these properties are important drivers of network performance and adaptability. In
                                              addition to shedding light on the emergence of hierarchy across the many domains in which it appears, these
                                              findings will also accelerate future research into evolving more complex, intelligent computational brains in
                                              the fields of artificial intelligence and robotics.

                                        Introduction

                                        Hierarchy is an important organizational property in many biological and man-made systems, ranging from
                                        neural [1, 2], ecological [3], metabolic [4], and genetic regulatory networks [5], to the organization of companies
                                        [6], cities [7], societies [8], and the Internet [9, 10]. There are many types of hierarchy [11, 12, 13], but the
                                        one most relevant for biological networks [14], especially neural networks [1, 2, 15], refers to a recursive
                                        organization of modules [10, 13]. Modules are defined as highly connected clusters of entities that are only
                                        sparsely connected to entities in other clusters [16, 17, 18]. Such hierarchy has long been recognized as
                                        a ubiquitous and beneficial design principle of both natural and man-made systems [14]. For example, in
                                        complex biological systems, the hierarchical composition of modules is thought to confer greater robustness
                                        and adaptability [1, 2, 19, 15], whereas in engineered designs, a hierarchical organization of simple structures
                                        accelerates the design, production, and redesign of artifacts [17, 20, 21].

                                        While most studies of hierarchy focus on producing methods to quantify it [11, 4, 9, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 14],
                                        a few have instead examined why hierarchy emerges in various systems. In some domains, the emergence of
                                        hierarchy is well understood; e.g., in complex systems, such as social networks, ecosystems, and road networks,
                                        the emergence of hierarchy can be explained solely by local decisions and or interactions [27, 28, 29, 3]. But,
                                        in biological systems, where the evolution of hierarchy is shaped by natural selection, why hierarchy evolves,
                                        and whether its evolution is due to direct or indirect selection, is an open and interesting question [3, 30].
Non-adaptive theories state that the hierarchy in some, but not all, types of biological networks may emerge as
a by-product of random processes [27]. Most adaptive explanations claim that hierarchy is directly selected for
because it confers evolvability [31], which is the ability of populations to quickly adapt to novel environments
[32]. Yet in computational experiments that simulate natural evolution, hierarchy rarely, if ever, evolves on
its own [33, 34, 35], suggesting that alternate explanations are required to explain the evolutionary origins
of hierarchy. Moreover, even if hierarchy, once present, is directly selected for because of the evolvability it
confers, explanations are still required for how that hierarchy emerges in the first place.

In this paper we investigate one such hypothesis: the existence of costs for network connections creates indirect
selection for the evolution of hierarchy. This hypothesis is based on two lines of reasoning. The first is that
hierarchy requires a recursive composition of modules [10], and the second is that hierarchy includes sparsity.
A recent study demonstrated that both modularity and sparsity evolve because of the presence of a cost for
network connections [16]. Connection costs may therefore promote both modularity and sparsity, and thus
may also promote the evolution of hierarchy.

It is realistic to incorporate connection costs into biological network models because it is known that there
are costs to create connections, maintain them, and transmit information along them [36, 37]. Additionally,
evidence supports the existence of a selection pressure in biological networks to minimize the net cost of
connections. For example, multiple studies have shown that biological neural networks, which are hierarchical
[1, 2], have been organized to reduce their amount of wiring by having fewer long connections and by locating
neurons optimally to reduce the wiring between them [37, 38, 39, 40].

A relationship between hierarchy and connection costs can also be observed in a variety of different man-made
systems. For example, very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), which are designed to minimize wiring, are
hierarchically organized [15]. In organizations such as militaries and companies, a hierarchical communication
model has been shown to be an ideal configuration when there is a cost for communication links between
organization members [41]. However, there is no prior work that tests whether the presence of connection
costs is responsible for the evolution of hierarchy. Here we test that hypothesis in computational simulations
of evolution and our experiments confirm that hierarchy does indeed evolve when there is a cost for network
connections (Fig. 1).

We also investigate the hypothesis that hierarchy confers evolvability, which has long been argued [1, 2, 15, 42],
but has not previously been extensively tested [15]. Our experiments confirm that hierarchical networks,
evolved in response to connection costs, exhibit an enhanced ability to adapt.

Experimentally investigating the evolution of hierarchy in biological networks is impractical, because natural
evolution is slow and it is not currently possible to vary the cost of biological connections. Therefore, we
conduct experiments in computational simulations of evolving networks. Computational simulations of evo-
lution have shed substantial light on open, important questions in evolutionary biology [43, 44, 45], including

Table 1: The main problem (pictured in Fig. 2A). Networks receive 8-bit vectors as inputs. As shown, a suc-

cessful network could AND adjacent input pairs, XOR the resulting pairs, and AND the result. Performance

is a function only of the final output, and thus does not depend on how the network solves the problem;

Other, non-hierarchical solutions also exist.

                                               Values

Input pattern 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 1

AND gate                                       0101

XOR gate                                          1       1

AND gate                                               1

                                               2
Figure 1: The main hypothesis. Evolution with selection for performance only results in non-hierarchical and
non-modular networks, which take longer to adapt to new environments. Evolving networks with a connection
cost, however, creates hierarchical and functionally modular networks that can solve the overall problem by
recursively solving its sub-problems. These networks also adapt to new environments faster.

the evolution of modularity [16, 18, 46, 47, 48], a structural property closely related to hierarchy. In such
simulations, randomly generated individuals recombine, mutate, and reproduce based on a fitness function
that evaluates each individual according to how well they perform a task. The task can be analogous to
efficiently metabolizing resources or performing a required behavior. This process of evolution cycles for a
predetermined number of generations.

We evolved computational abstractions of animal brains called artificial neural networks (ANNs) [49, 50] to
solve hierarchical Boolean logic problems (Fig. 2A). In addition to abstracting animal brains, ANNs have also
been used as abstractions of gene regulatory networks [51]. They abstract both because they sense their envi-
ronment through inputs and produce outputs, which can either be interpreted as regulating genes or moving
muscles (Methods). In our experiments, we evolve the ANNs with or without a cost for network connections.
Specifically, the experimental treatment selects for maximizing performance and minimizing connection costs
(performance and connection cost, P&CC), whereas the control treatment selects for performance only (per-
formance alone, PA).

In all treatments the evolving networks have eight inputs and a single output. During evaluation, each network
is tested on all possible (256) input patterns of zeros and ones, and the network's output is checked against
a hierarchical Boolean logic function provided with the same input (Fig. 2A and Table 1). An ANN output
 0 is considered True and an output < 0 is considered False. A network's performance (fitness) is its percent
of correct answers over all input patterns.

Results

On the main experimental problem (Fig. 2A), the addition of a connection cost leads to the evolution of
significantly more hierarchical networks (Fig. 2B,G). Confirming previous findings on different problems [16,
35], the addition of a connection cost also significantly increases modularity (Fig. 2C,G) and reduces the
number of generations required to evolve a solution (Fig. 2D).

Importantly, while final performance levels for the performance and connection cost (P&CC) treatment are
similar to those of the performance alone (PA) treatment, there is a qualitative difference in how the networks
solve the problem. P&CC networks exhibit functional hierarchy in that they solve the overall problem by
recursively combining solutions to sub-problems (Fig. 2F), whereas the PA networks tend to combine all input

                                                                       3
   A                  12 34 56 78                               E

                      AND AND AND AND

                      XOR  XOR

                          AND

B 0.90
            Performance and Connection Cost (P&CC)

   hierarchy    0.80

                0.70                                            F

   p<00..60050                   Performance Alone (PA)
                      5000 10000 15000 20000 25000

C 0.60
             Performance and Connection Cost (P&CC)

   modularity   0.40

                0.20
                                        Performance Alone (PA)

   p<00..00050        5000 10000 15000 20000 25000 G                                              hierarchy       modularity         % sub-problems
                                                                                                                                            solved
D                     Performance and Connection Cost (P&CC)       0.9                                       0.6
                                                                           p <0.00001                                  p <0.00001           p <0.00001
                                                                                                                                   100
                                                                   0.8                                       0.4
                1.00                                                                                                               80
                                                                                                             0.2
   performance            Performance Alone (PA)                                                                                   60
                0.98
                                                                                                                                   40
                                                                                             0.7
                                                                                                                                   20

                0.96                                               1                                                               0

                                                                   0.6 PA                         P&CC 0.0 PA  P&CC                    PA  P&CC

   p<00..90450        5000 1g0e0n00erat1i5o0n0s0 20000 25000

Figure 2: A cost for network connections produces networks that are significantly more hierarchical, modular,
high-performing, and likely to functionally decompose a problem. The algorithms for quantifying hierarchy
and modularity are described in Methods. The bars below plots indicate at which generation a significant
difference exists between the two treatments. (A) The hierarchical AND-XOR-AND problem (the default for
our experiments). The top eight nodes are inputs to the problem and the bottom node is an output. (B)
P&CC networks are significantly more hierarchical than PA networks. p-values are from the Mann-Whitney-
Wilcoxon rank-sum test, which is the default statistical test throughout the paper unless otherwise stated. (C)
P&CC networks are also significantly more modular than PA networks, confirming a previous finding [16, 35].
(D) P&CC networks evolve a solution to the problem significantly faster. (E) Evolved networks from the
16 highest-performing replicates in the PA treatment. The networks are non-hierarchical, non-modular, and
do not tend to decompose the problem. Each network panel reports fitness/performance (F), hierarchy (H),
and modularity (M). Nodes are colored if they solve one of the logic sub-functions in (A). Fig. S1 shows
networks from all 30 replicates for both treatments. (F) Evolved networks from the 16 highest-performing
replicates in the P&CC treatment. The networks are hierarchical, modular, and decompose the problem. (G)
A comparison of P&CC and PA networks from the final generation. P&CC networks are significantly more
hierarchical, modular, and solve significantly more sub-problems.

                                                                       4
information in the first layer and then process it in a monolithic fashion (Fig. 2E). Such functional hierarchy
can be quantified as the percent of sub-problems a network solves (e.g. the AND and XOR gates in Fig. 2A).
A sub-problem is considered solved if, for all possible network inputs, and for any threshold, a neuron in a
network exists that outputs an above-threshold value whenever the answer to the sub-problem is True, and
a sub-threshold value when the answer is False, or vice-versa (Methods). This measure reveals that evolved
P&CC networks solve significantly more sub-problems than their PA counterparts (Fig. 2G, p < 2.6 × 10-16
via Fisher's exact test).
To further investigate how the ability to solve sub-problems is related to hierarchy and modularity, we plotted
the percent of sub-problems solved vs. both hierarchy and modularity (Fig. 3). The plots show a significant,
strong, positive correlation between the ability to solve sub-problems and both hierarchy and modularity.

Figure 3: Solving sub-problems is correlated with both hierarchy (left) and modularity (right). The shape
sizes and enclosed numbers indicate the number of networks at that coordinate (an empty shape indicates only
one network is present). The Pearson's correlation coefficient is 0.96 for hierarchy and 0.87 for modularity,
indicating strong, linear, positive relationships. Both correlations are significant (p < 0.00001) according to a
t-test with a correlation of zero as the null hypothesis.
It has been hypothesized that one advantage of network hierarchy is that it confers evolvablity [1, 2, 15]. We
test this hypothesis by first evolving networks to solve one problem (the base environment) and then evolving
those networks to solve a different problem (the target environment). To isolate evolvability, we keep initial
performance equal by taking the first 30 runs of each treatment (PA and P&CC) that evolve a perfectly-
performing network for the base environment [16]. Each of these 30 networks then seeds 30 runs in the target
environment (for 900 total replicates per treatment). The base and target problems are both hierarchical
and share some, but not all, sub-problems (Fig. 4). Evolution in the target environment continues until the
new problem is solved or 25000 generations elapse. We quantify evolvability as the number of generations
required to solve the target problem [16]. We performed three such experiments, each with different base
and target problems. In all experiments, P&CC networks take significantly fewer generations to adapt to the
new environment than PA networks. They also solve significantly more of the target problem's sub-problems
(Fig. 4).
One possible reason for the fast adaptation of P&CC networks is that their modular structure allows solutions

                                                                       5
Figure 4: P&CC networks adapt significantly faster and solve significantly more sub-problems in new envi-
ronments. In these experiments, networks first evolve to solve a problem perfectly in a base environment (left)
and are then placed in a target environment (right) where they continue evolving to solve a different problem.
The evolvability of PA and P&CC networks is quantified as the number of generations they take to solve
the new problem perfectly. A pair of evolved networks is shown for both treatments. The left one shows the
network with median hierarchy (here and elsewhere, rounding up) of 30 replicates in the base environment;
the right one shows the median hierarchy network of the 30 runs in the target environment started with the
network on the left. Figs. S5-S10 show all network pairs.

to sub-problems to be re-used in different contexts [16]. A hierarchical structure may also be beneficial if
both problems are hierarchical, even if the computation at points in the structure is different. For example,
modules that solve XOR gates can quickly be rewired to solve EQU gates (Fig. 4A). Another reason for
faster P&CC adaptation could be that these networks are sparser, meaning that fewer connections need to
be optimized.

To further understand why connection costs increase hierarchy, we generated 20000 random, valid networks
for each number of connections a network could have (Methods). A network is valid if it has a path from each
of the input nodes to the output node. The networks were neither evolved nor evaluated for performance.
Of these networks, those that are low-cost tend to have high hierarchy, and those with a high cost have low
hierarchy (Fig. 5, left). This inherent association between low connection costs and high hierarchy suggests
why selecting for low-cost networks promotes the evolution of hierarchical networks. It also suggests why
networks evolve to be non-hierarchical without a pressure to minimize connection costs. Indeed, most evolved
PA networks reside in the high-cost, low-hierarchy region, whereas all P&CC networks occupy the low-cost,
high-hierarchy region (Fig. 5 left).

Similarly, there is also an inverse relationship between cost and modularity for these random networks (Fig. 5,
right), as was shown in [16]. All evolved P&CC networks are found in the low-cost, high-modularity region;
PA networks are spread over the low-modularity, high-cost region (Fig. 5, right).

As Figs. 3 and 5 suggest, network modularity and hierarchy are highly correlated (Fig. S12, Pearson's
correlation coefficient = 0.92, p < 0.00001 based on a t-test with a correlation of zero as the null hypothesis).

                                                                       6
                                   0.48                                    0.5  2                         0.54
                                                                                3
       6                     PA                                                                     PA    0.48
                             P&CC
0.85                               0.42                                         6                   P&CC  0.42

        2 16                       0.36 0.4 15                                                            0.36
hierarchy
                                                               modularity0.80 40.30                       0.30

0.75                               0.24 0.3                                                               0.24

0.70                               0.18                                                                   0.18

0.65                               0.12 0.2                                                               0.12
            50
                                   0.06                                                                   0.06

                100cost 150  200   0.00                                    0.1     50  100cost 150      200 0.00

Figure 5: Lower cost networks are more hierarchical and modular. The hierarchy (left) and modularity
(right) of randomly generated (i.e. non-functional) networks is shown for each cost after being normalized
per cost value and then smoothed by a Gaussian kernel density estimation function. Colors indicate the
probability of a network being generated at that location (heat map). Networks evolved in either the P&CC
or PA treatment are overlaid as green circles or blue triangles, respectively. Circle or triangle size and the
enclosed number indicate the number of networks at that coordinate (no number means 1). All evolved
P&CC networks are in the high-hierarchy, low-cost region. Most evolved PA networks are in the high-cost,
low-hierarchy region.

It is thus unclear whether hierarchy evolves as a direct consequence of connection costs, or if its evolution is a
by-product of evolved modularity. To address this issue we ran an additional experiment where evolutionary
fitness was a function of networks being low-cost (as in the P&CC treatment), high-performing (as in all
treatments), and non-modular (achieved by selecting for low modularity scores). We call this treatment
P&CC-NonMod. The results reveal that P&CC-NonMod networks have the same low level of modularity as
PA networks (Fig. 6A-B, p = 0.23), but have significantly higher hierarchy (Fig. 6A, C, p < 0.00001) and
solve significantly more sub-problems than PA networks (Fig. 6D). These results reveal that, independent of
modularity, a connection cost promotes the evolution of hierarchy. Additionally, P&CC-NonMod networks
are significantly more evolvable than PA networks (Fig. 6E-G), revealing that hierarchy promotes evolvability
independently of the known evolvability improvements caused by modularity [16].

To gain better insight into the relationship between modularity, hierarchy, and performance, we searched for
the highest-performing networks at all possible levels of modularity and hierarchy. We performed this search
with the multi-dimensional archive of phenotypic elites (MAP-Elites) algorithm [52]. The results show that
networks with the same modularity can have a wide range of different levels of hierarchy, and vice-versa, which
indicates that these network properties can vary independently (Fig. 7). Additionally, the high-hierarchy, high-
modularity region, in which evolved P&CC networks reside, contains more high-performing solutions than the
low-hierarchy, low-modularity region where PA networks reside (Fig. 7), suggesting an explanation for why
P&CC networks find high-performing solutions faster (Fig. 2D).

To test the generality of our hypothesis that the addition of a connection cost promotes the evolution of
hierarchy in addition to modularity, we repeated our experiments with different Boolean-logic problems. For all
problem variants, P&CC networks are significantly more hierarchical, modular, and solve more sub-problems
than PA networks (Fig. 8). The P&CC treatment also evolved high-performing networks significantly faster
on all of these additional problems (Fig. S13).

                                                                       7
A                                                E 12 34 5678 12 34 56 78

                                                    AND AND AND AND              AND AND AND AND

                                                    XOR                     XOR      EQU       EQU

                                                                       AND                AND

                                                 F

                                                                                 PA

B       modularity     C       hierarchy   D      G % sub-problems        P&CC-NonMod
                                                          solved             generations to
   0.6                    0.9  p <0.00001                                    adapt to a new
                                                 100 p <0.00001               environment
        p >0.05                                   80                                p <0.00001
                                                  60
   0.4                    0.8                     40                   25000
                                                  20                   20000
   0.2                    0.7                       0                  15000
                                                       PA P&CC-NonMod  10000
   0.0 PA P&CC-NonMod     0.6 PA P&CC-NonMod
                                                                        5000
                                                                             0 PA P&CC-NonMod

Figure 6: Evolving low-cost, high-performing networks that are non-modular reveals that independent of
modularity, a connection cost promotes the evolution of hierarchy. (A) Networks from the 16 highest-
performing P&CC-NonMod replicates (Fig. S4 shows networks from all 30 trials). The networks are hierarchal,
but not highly modular. (B) There is no significant difference in modularity between P&CC-NonMod and PA
networks, but P&CC-NonMod networks are significantly more hierarchical (C) and solve significantly more
sub-problems (D) than PA networks. (E-G) P&CC-NonMod networks also adapt significantly faster to a new
environment than PA networks, suggesting that hierarchy promotes evolvability independently of modularity.
(E) The base and target problem for this evolvability experiment. (F) A perfect-performing network evolved
for the base problem (left) and a descendant network evolved on the target problem (right). The example
networks are those with median hierarchy: Fig. S11 shows all pairs. (G) P&CC-NonMod networks adapt
significantly faster to the new problem.

Discussion

The evolution of hierarchy is likely caused by multiple factors. These results suggest that one of those factors is
indirect selection to reduce the net cost of network connections. Adding a cost for connections has previously
been shown to evolve modularity [16, 35]; the results in this paper confirm that finding and further show
that a cost for connections also leads to the evolution of hierarchy. Moreover, the hierarchy that evolves is
functional, in that it involves solving a problem by recursively combining solutions to sub-problems. It is
likely that there are other forces that encourage the evolution of hierarchy, and that this connection cost force
operates in conjunction with them; identifying other drivers of the evolution of hierarchy and their relative
contributions is an interesting area for future research.

These results also reveal that, like modularity [47, 16], hierarchy improves evolvability. While modularity and
hierarchy are correlated, the experiments we conducted where we explicitly select for networks that are hier-
archical, but non-modular, reveal that hierarchy improves evolvability even when modularity is discouraged.

An additional factor that is present in modular and hierarchal networks is sparsity, a term meaning that only
a few connections exist of the total that could. It is possible that this property explains some or even all
of the evolvability benefits of modular, hierarchical networks. Future work is needed to address the difficult
challenge of experimentally teasing apart these related properties.

As has been pointed out for the evolution of modularity [16], even if hierarchy, once present, is directly selected
for because it increases evolvability, that does not explain its evolutionary origins, because enough hierarchy
has to be present in the first place before those evolvability gains can be selected for. This paper offers one
explanation for how sufficient hierarchy can emerge in the first place to then provide evolvability (or other)

                                              8
Figure 7: Network modularity and hierarchy can independently vary, and high-performing networks exist
with a wide range of modularity and hierarchy scores. The highest-performing networks evolution discovered
(with the MAP-Elites algorithm) for each combination of modularity and hierarchy. A few example networks
are shown, along with their fitness (F), hierarchy (H), and modularity (M). The best network from each of the
PA and P&CC treatments are also overlaid as blue triangles and green circles, respectively. The size of the
circles or triangles and the enclosed number indicate the number of networks at that coordinate (no number
means 1).

benefits that can be selected for.

This paper shows the effect of a connection cost on the evolution of hierarchy via experiments on many
variants of one class of problem (hierarchical logic problems with many inputs and one output). In future
work it will be interesting to test the generality of these results across different classes of problems, including
non-hierarchical problems. The data in this paper suggest that a connection cost will always make it more
likely for hierarchy to evolve, but it remains an open, interesting question how wide a range of problems
hierarchy will evolve on even with a connection cost.

In addition to shedding light on why biological networks evolve to be hierarchical, this work also lends
additional support to the hypothesis that a connection cost may also drive the emergence of hierarchy in
human-constructed networks, such as company organizations [41], road systems [53], and the Internet [9].
Furthermore, knowing how to evolve hierarchical networks can improve medical research [54, 55], which
benefits from more biologically realistic, and thus hierarchical, network models [56, 57].

The ability to evolve hierarchy will also aid fields that harness evolution to automatically generate solutions to
challenging engineering problems [58, 59], as it is known that hierarchy is a beneficial property in engineered

                                                                       9
Figure 8: Our results are qualitatively unchanged on different problems: P&CC networks are significantly
more modular, hierarchical, and solve more sub-problems than PA networks on different, hierarchical Boolean-
logic problems. For each problem, an example evolved network (specifically, the one with median hierarchy)
from each treatment is shown. Figs. S2 and S3 show the final, evolved network from each replicate for both
treatments on both problems. Note that for the problem on the right, an extra layer of hidden nodes was
added due to the complexity of the problem (Methods).

designs [17, 60]. In fact, artificial intelligence researchers have long sought to evolve computational neural
models that have the properties of modularity, regularity, and hierarchy [17, 61, 62, 63, 64], which are key
enablers of intelligence in animal brains [17, 65, 66, 67]. It has recently been shown that combining techniques
known to produce regularity [68] with a connection cost produces networks that are both modular and
regular [35]. This work suggests that doing so can produce networks that have all three properties, a hypothesis
we will confirm in future work. Being able to create networks with all three properties will both improve our
efforts to study the evolution of natural intelligence and accelerate our ability to recreate it artificially.

Method and Materials

Experimental setup

There were 30 trials per treatment. Each trial is an independent evolutionary process that is initiated with
a different random seed, meaning that the sequence of stochastic events that drive evolution (e.g. mutation,
selection) are different. Each trial lasted 25000 generations and had a population size of 1000. Unless otherwise
stated, all analyses and visualizations are based on the highest-performing network per trial (ties are broken
randomly).

Statistics

The test of statistical significance is the Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon rank-sum test, unless otherwise stated. We
report and plot medians ± 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals of the medians, which are calculated by
re-sampling the data 5000 times. For visual clarity we reduce the re-sampling noise inherent in bootstrapping
by smoothing confidence intervals with a median filter (window size of 101).

                                                                      10
Evolutionary algorithm

Networks evolve via a multi-objective evolutionary algorithm called the Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Al-
gorithm version II (NSGA-II), which was first introduced in [69]. While the original NSGA-II weights all
objectives equally, to explore the consequence of having the performance objective be more important than
the connection cost objective, Clune et al. [16] created a stochastic version of NSGA-II (called probabilistic
NSGA-II, or PNSGA) where each objective is considered for selection with a certain probability (a detailed
explanation can be found in [16] and Fig. S15a). Specifically, performance factors into selection 100% of
the time and the connection cost objective factors in p percent of the time. Preliminary experiments for this
paper demonstrated that values of p of 0.25, 0.5, and 1.0 led to qualitatively similar results. However, for
simplicity and because the largest differences between P&CC and PA treatments resulted from p = 1, we
chose that value as the default for this paper. Note that when p = 1, NSGA-II and PNSGA are identical.

Behavioral diversity

Evolutionary algorithms notoriously get stuck in local optima (locally, but not globally, high-fitness areas), in
part because limited computational resources require smaller population sizes than are found in nature [59].
To make computational evolution more representative of natural evolutionary populations, which exhibit
more diversity, we adopt the common technique of promoting behavioral diversity [59, 70, 71, 72, 73, 16] by
adding another independent objective that rewards individuals for behaving differently than other individuals
in the population. This diversity objective factored into selection 100% of the time. Preliminary experiments
confirmed that this diversity-promoting technique is necessary. Without it, evolution does not reliably produce
functional networks in either treatment, as has been previously shown when evolving networks with properties
such as modularity [16, 35].

To calculate the behavioral diversity of a network, for each input we store a network's output (response) in a
binary vector; output values > 0 are stored as 1 and 0 otherwise. How different a network's behavior is from
the population is calculated by computing the Hamming distance between that network's output vector and
all the output vectors of all other networks (and normalizing the result to get a behavioral diversity measure
between 0 and 1).

Connection cost

Following [16], the connection cost of a network is computed after finding an optimal node placement for
internal (hidden) nodes (input and output nodes have fixed locations) that minimizes the overall network
connection cost. These locations can be computed exactly [74]. Optimizing the location of internal nodes is
biologically motivated; there is evidence that the location of neurons in animal nervous systems are optimized
to minimize the summed length of connections between them [36, 37, 74]. The overall network connection
cost is then computed as the summed squared length of all connections. Network visualizations show these
optimal neural placements.

Network nodes are located in a two-dimensional Cartesian space (x,y). The locations of input and output
nodes are fixed, and the locations of hidden nodes vary according to their optimal location as just described.

For all problems, the inputs have x coordinates of {-3.5, -2.5, ..., 2.5, 3.5}, a y coordinate of (0), and the output
is located at (0,4), except for the problem in Fig. 8, right, which has an output located at (0, 5) because of
the extra layer of hidden neurons.

                                                                      11
Network model and its biological relevance

The network model is multi-layered and feed-forward, meaning a node at layer n receives incoming connections
only from nodes at layer n - 1 and has outgoing connections only to nodes at layer n + 1. This network model
is common for investigating questions in systems biology [49, 48, 75], including studies into the evolution
of modularity [16, 76]. While the layered and feed-forward nature of networks may contribute to elevated
hierarchy, this network architecture is the same across all treatments and we are interested in the differences
between levels of hierarchy that occur with and without a connection cost.

For the main problem, AND-XOR-AND, networks are of the form 8 \ 4 \ 4 \ 2 \ 1, which means that there are 8
input nodes, 3 hidden layers each having 4, 4 and 2 nodes respectively, and 1 output node. The integers {-2, -1,
1, 2} are the possible values for connection weights, whereas the possible values for the biases are {-2, -1, 0, 1, 2}.

Information flows through the network in discrete time stpdf one layer at a time. The output yj of node j is
the result of the function:

                          yj = tanh  iIj ij yi + bj                               (1)

where Ij is the set of nodes connected to node j, wij is the connection strength between node i and node
j, yi is the output value of node i, and bj is a bias. The bias determines at which input value the output
changes from negative to positive. The function, tanh(x), is an activation function that guarantees that the
output of a node is in the range of [-1, 1]. The slope of the transition between the two extreme output values
is determined by , which is here set to 20 (Figs. S15B-C).

Following (16), in all treatments, the initial number of connections in networks is randomly chosen between
20 and 100. If that chosen number of initial connections is more than the maximum number of connections
that a network can have (which is 58), the network is fully connected. When random, valid networks are
generated, the initial number of connections ranges from the minimum number needed, which is 11, to the
maximum number possible, which is 58. Each connection is assigned a random weight selected from the
possible values for connection weights and is placed between randomly chosen, unconnected neurons residing
on two consecutive layers. Our results are qualitatively unchanged when the initial number of connections is
smaller than the default, i.e. when evolution starts with sparse networks (Fig. S14).

Mutations

To create offspring, a parent network is copied and then randomly mutated. Each network has a 20% chance

of having a single connection added. Candidates for new connections are pairs of unconnected nodes that

reside on two consecutive layers. Each network also has a 20% chance of a randomly chosen connection being

removed. Each node in the network has 0.067% chance of its bias being incremented or decremented with both

options equally probable; five values are available {-2, -1, 0, 1, 2} and mutations that produce values higher

or lower than these values are ignored.  Each connection in the network has  2.0  chance of its weight being
                                                                              n

incremented or decremented, where n is the total number of connections in the network. Because weights

must be in the set of possible values {-2, -1, 1, 2}, mutations that produce values higher or lower than these

four values are ignored.

Modularity

Network modularity is calculated with an efficient approximation [77] of the commonly used Q metric de-
veloped by [78]. Because that metric has been extensively described before [78], here we only describe it
briefly. The Q metric defines network modularity, for a particular division of the network, as the number of

                                            12
within-module edges minus the expected number of these edges in an equivalent network, where edges are
placed randomly [78]. The formula for this metric is:

                  1       [Aij  -  kiin kjout  ]ci,cj            (2)
           Q=                         m

                  m

                     ij

Where kiin and kjout are the in- and out-degree of node i and j, respectively, m is the total number of edges in
the network, Aij is the connectivity matrix, which is 1 if there is an edge from node i to j, and 0 otherwise,

and ci,cj is a function whose value is 1 if nodes i and j belong to the same module, and 0 otherwise.

Hierarchy

Our hierarchy measure comes from [11]. It ranks nodes based on their influence. A node's influence on a
network equals the portion of a network that is reachable from that node (respecting the fact that edges are
directed). Based on this metric, the larger the proportion of a network a node can reach, via its outgoing
edges, the more influential it is. For example, a root node has more influence because a path can be traced
from it to every node in the network, whereas leaf nodes have no influence. The metric calculates network
hierarchy by computing the heterogeneity of the influence values of all nodes in the network. Intuitively,
node-influence heterogeneity is high in hierarchical networks (where some nodes have a great deal of influence
and others none), and low in non-hierarchical networks (e.g. in a fully connected network the influence of
nodes is perfectly homogeneous).

Because of the non-linear function that maps a node's inputs to its output, even a small change in the input
to a node can change whether it fires. For that reason, it is difficult to determine the influence one node
has on another based on the strength of the connection between them. We thus calculate hierarchy scores by
looking only at the presence of connections between nodes, ignoring the strength of those connections. The
score for a weighted directed network is calculated by:

                     iV [CRmax - CR(i)]                          (3)

                          N -1

CRmax is the highest influence value and V represents a set of all nodes in the network. N is the number of

nodes in the network. Each node in the network is represented by i. CR(i), the influence value of node i, is

given by:

           1                                   [  1           ]  (4)
           CR(i) = N - 1
                          j :0<dout (i,j )<       dout(i, j)

Here, dout(i, j) is the length of the path that goes from node i to node j, meaning it is the number of outgoing
connections along the path.

Functional hierarchy

As a proxy for quantifying functional hierarchy, we measure the percent of logic sub-problems of an overall
problem that are solved by part of a network. Note that an overall logic problem can be solved without solving
any specific sub-problem (e.g. in the extreme, if the entire problem is computed in one step). We determine
whether a logic sub-problem is solved as follows: for all possible inputs to a network, a neuron solves a logic
gate (a sub-problem) if, for its outputs, there exists any threshold value that correctly separates all the True
answers from the False answers for the logic gate in question. We also consider a sub-problem as solved if it
is solved by a group of neurons on the same layer. To check for this case, we consider all possible groupings
of neurons in a layer (groups of all sizes are checked). We sum the outputs of the neurons in a group and

                          13
see if there is a threshold that correctly separates True and False for the logic sub-problem on all possible
network inputs. To prevent counting solutions multiple times, each sub-problem is considered only once: i.e.
the algorithm stops searching when a sub-problem is found to be solved.
Supplementary Information

                                                                      14
A. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

                           AND AND AND AND

                           XOR       XOR

                                AND

B. Performance Alone (PA)            C. Performance & Connection Cost (P&CC)

Fig. S 1: The addition of a connection cost leads to the evolution of hierarchical, modular, and functionally
hierarchical networks. In this visualization, networks are first sorted by fitness (F), then by hierarchy (H),
and finally by modularity (M). Network nodes are colored if they solve a logic subproblem of the overall
problem (Methods). (A) The main experimental problem in the paper, AND-XOR-AND. (B-C) The highest-
performing networks at the end of each trial of the performance alone (PA) treatment (left) are less hierarchical,
modular, and functionally hierarchical than networks from the performance and connection cost (P&CC)
treatment (right).

                                                                      15
A. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

                           AND AND AND AND

                           EQU       EQU

                                AND

B. Performance Alone (PA)            C. Performance & Connection Cost (P&CC)

Fig. S 2: The results from the main experiment are qualitatively the same on a second, different, hierarchical
problem: AND-EQU-AND (A). The highest-performing networks at the end of each trial of the performance
alone (PA) treatment (B) are less hierarchical, modular, and functionally hierarchal than networks from the
performance and connection cost (P&CC) treatment (C). Networks are first sorted by fitness (F), then by
hierarchy(H), and finally by modularity (M).

                                                                      16
A. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

                           OR OR OR OR

                           XOR       EQU

                                EQU

B. Performance Alone (PA)                 C. Performance & Connection Cost (P&CC)

Fig. S 3: The results from the main experiment are qualitatively the same on a third, different, hierarchical
problem: OR-XOR/EQU-EQU. See the previous caption for a lengthier explanation. These networks have
an extra layer of hidden nodes vs. the default network model owing to the extra complexity of the last logic
gate, EQU.

                                                                      17
A. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

AND AND AND AND

XOR                  XOR

                AND

B. P&CC-NonMod

Fig. S 4: Evolving networks with a connection cost, but an additional explicit pressure to be non-modular,
produces networks that are hierarchical, but non-modular. These results show that a connection cost promotes
hierarchy independent of the modularity-inducing effects of a connection cost. (A) The problem for this
experiment, which was the default experiment for the paper (AND-XOR-AND). (B) Almost all of the end-
of-run networks from this P&CC-NonMod treatment are hierarchical, yet have low modularity.

                                                                      18
A. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8                          12 34 56 78

                           AND AND AND AND  AND AND AND AND

                           XOR       XOR    EQU       EQU

                                AND              AND

B. Performance Alone (PA)

Fig. S 5: (part 1 of 2) The networks from the PA treatment for the first evolvability experiment, in which
networks are first evolved to perfect fitness on the AND-XOR-AND problem and then are transferred (black
arrow) to the AND-EQU-AND problem (A). The highest-performing network from each replicate in the base
environment seeds 30 independent runs in the target environment, leading to a total of 900 replicates per
treatment in the target environment. (B) In this visualization the best-performing networks from the original
environment are on the left side of each arrow and on the right side is an example descendant network from
the target environment (specifically, the network with median hierarchy).

                                                                      19
      Performance & Connection Cost (P&CC)

Fig. S 6: (part 2 of 2) The networks from the P&CC treatment for the first evolvability experiment. See the
previous caption for a more detailed explanation.

                                                                      20
A. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8                   12 34 56 78

AND AND AND AND                      OR OR   OR OR
                                        XOR     XOR
XOR                             XOR

                           AND       AND

B. Performance Alone (PA)

Fig. S 7: (part 1 of 2) The second, AND-XOR-AND to OR-XOR-AND, evolvability experiment (A) and
the networks from the PA treatment for this experiment (B). Except for a different target environment, this
experiment has the same setup as the evolvability experiment in Fig. S5.

                                                                      21
     Performance & Connection Cost (P&CC)

Fig. S 8: (part 2 of 2) The P&CC treatment networks from the second, AND-XOR-AND to OR-XOR-AND,
evolvability experiment (pictured in Fig. S7). Except for a different target environment, this experiment has
the same setup as the evolvability experiment shown in Fig. S5.

                                                                      22
A. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8         1 2 34 56 78

OR OR   OR OR              AND AND AND AND
   XOR    EQU
                           EQU       EQU

EQU                             AND

B. Performance Alone (PA)

Fig. S 9: (part 1 of 2) The third evolvability experiment, OR-XOR/EQU-EQU to AND-EQU-AND (A), and
the networks from the PA treatment for this experiment (B). Except for a different base environment, this
experiment has the same setup as the evolvability experiment shown in Fig. S5.

                                                                      23
     Performance & Connection Cost (P&CC)

Fig. S 10: (part 2 of 2) The networks from the P&CC treatment for the third, OR-XOR/EQU-EQU to
AND-EQU-AND, evolvability experiment (pictured in Fig. S9). Except for a different base environment, this
experiment has the same setup as the evolvability experiment in Fig. S5.

                                                                      24
A. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8        12 34 56 78

AND AND AND AND           AND AND AND AND

XOR                  XOR  EQU       EQU

                AND            AND

B. P&CC-NonMod

Fig. S 11: Evolvability is improved even in networks that are hierarchical, but non-modular, demonstrating
that the property of hierarchy conveys evolvability independent of modularity. (A) The base problem that
networks originally evolved on (left) and the new, target problem that networks are transferred to and further
evolved on (right). (B) In each pair, on the left is a perfect-performing network evolved for the base problem
and on the right is an example descendant network that evolved on the target problem (specifically, the
descendant network with median hierarchy). Except for being the P&CC-NonMod treatment, this evolvability
experiment has the same setup as the evolvability experiment in Fig. S5.

                                                                      25
                        0.85      PA                                      6
                                  P&CC                            15

             hierarchy  0.80                                                      3

                        0.75

                        0.70 2 2

                        0.65        23
                                  2
                        0.1       0.2 mod0u.3larity0.4            0.5

Fig. S 12: There is a strong, linear, and positive correlation between network hierarchy and modularity. The
Pearson's correlation coefficient is 0.92. The correlation is significant (p < 0.00001), as calculated by a t-test
with a correlation of zero as the null hypothesis. Larger circles or triangles indicate the presence of more than
one network at that location (the number describes how many).

       Performance and Connection Cost (P&CC)               1.00 Performance and Connection Cost (P&CC)
1.00

0.98performance                                             0.97
                                               performance
             Performance Alone (PA)

0.96                                                        0.94

p<00..90450  5000 1g0e0n00erat1i5o0n0s0 20000 25000 p<00..90150              Performance Alone (PA)

                                                                  5000 1g0e0n00erat1i5o0n0s0 20000 25000

Fig. S 13: In addition to the main experimental problem, the P&CC treatment also evolved high-performing
networks faster than the PA treatment on two different problems (AND-EQU-AND, left, and OR-XOR/EQU-
EQU, right; both are pictured in Fig. 8 in the main text). The bar below each plot indicates when a significant
difference exists between the two treatments.

                                               26
A hierarchy        B  modularity C    % sub-problems
                                               solved
   0.9 p <0.00001     0.6 p <0.00001           p <0.00001
   0.8                                1086000
                      0.4

0.7                   0.2             24000 PA

0.6 PA P&CC           0.0 PA P&CC               P&CC

Fig. S 14: Our results are qualitatively unchanged when initializing networks with sparsely connected net-
works. In this experiment, the minimum and maximum number of initial connections that networks start
with in generation 0 are 11 and 20, respectively. Due to the fact that at least 11 connections are needed
to solve the experimental problem, networks that have an initial number of connections within this range
are considered sparse (note: the default range for initial number of connections is [20, 100], Methods). The
hierarchy (A), modularity (B), and percent of sub-problems solved (C) are significantly higher for end-of-run
P&CC networks, indicating that, regardless of the initial connectivity of networks, a connection cost promotes
the evolution of these traits.

                           27
A                            Copy                                                                     Pareto ranking            Selecting the first N
                                                                                                                                   best individuals
           N individuals                                                                                    L1 L2 L3
                                                                                                                                       L1
                                   N individuals
                                                                                                                                                                      N
                          Selection and mutation                                         Performance
                                                                        N offspring                                                    L2

                                                                                                                                       L3

                                                                                                           Connection Cost
                                                                                     New generation

B                                                                                        C            1.0
        Input pattern
           Input layer                                                                                    0.5

         hidden layer                                                                                 y 0.0
         output layer
      output pattern                                                                                  -0.5

                                                                                                      -1.0-2                -1  x0  1                                    2

Fig. S 15: Details of the evolutionary algorithm (figure adapted from [16]). (A) A graphical depiction of the

the multi-objective evolutionary algorithm in our study, which is called the Non-dominated Sorting Genetic

Algorithm version II (NSGA-II)[69]. In NSGA-II, evolution starts with a population of N randomly generated

networks. N offspring are generated by randomly mutating the best of these individuals (as determined by

tournament selection, wherein the best organism of 2 randomly selected organisms is chosen to produce

offspring asexually). The combined pool of offspring and the current population are ranked based on Pareto

dominance, and the best N networks are selected to form the next generation. This process continues for

a fixed number of generations or until networks with the desired performance or properties evolve. (B) An

example network model. Networks are typically used by researchers to abstract the activities of many biological

networks, such as gene regulatory networks and neural networks [16, 47, 48, 51, 59]. Nodes (analogous to

neurons or genes) represent processing units that receive inputs from neighbors or external sources and process

them to compute an output signal that is propagated to other nodes. For example, nodes at the input layer are

activated by environmental stimuli and their output is passed to internal nodes. In this figure, arrows indicate

a connection between two nodes, and thus illustrate the pathways through which information flows. Each

connection has a weight, which is a number that controls the strength of interaction between the two nodes.

Information flows through the network, ultimately determining the firing pattern of output nodes. The firing

patterns of output nodes can be considered as commands that activate genes in a gene regulatory network or

that move muscles in an animal body. The output value of each node, y, is a function of its weighted inputs

and bias. In this paper, the specific activation function is tanh(20x), where x = i (wiIi + b), and where Ii
is the ith input, wi the associated synaptic weight, and b a bias that, like the weight vector, is evolved. The

specific function is depicted in (C). Multiplying the input by 20 makes the function more like a step function.

The output range is [-1,1].                                                          28
References

 [1] Meunier, David, Renaud Lambiotte, and Edward T. Bullmore (2010). Modular and hierarchically modular
      organization of brain networks. Frontiers in neuroscience, 4.

 [2] Meunier, D., Lambiotte, R., Fornito, A., Ersche, K. D., & Bullmore, E. T. (2009). Hierarchical modularity
      in human brain functional networks. Frontiers in neuroinformatics, 3.

 [3] Miller III, W. (2008). The hierarchical structure of ecosystems: connections to evolution. Evolution:
      Education and Outreach, 1(1), 16-24.

 [4] Ravasz, E., Somera, A. L., Mongru, D. A., Oltvai, Z. N., & Barabsi, A. L. (2002). Hierarchical organization
      of modularity in metabolic networks. science, 297(5586), 1551-1555.

 [5] Yu, H., & Gerstein, M. (2006). Genomic analysis of the hierarchical structure of regulatory networks.
      Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103(40), 14724-14731.

 [6] Rowe, R., Creamer, G., Hershkop, S., & Stolfo, S. J. (2007). Automated social hierarchy detection through
      email network analysis. In Proceedings of the 9th WebKDD and 1st SNA-KDD 2007 workshop on Web
      mining and social network analysis (pp. 109-117). ACM.

 [7] Krugman, Paul (1996). Confronting the mystery of urban hierarchy. Journal of the Japanese and Inter-
      national economies 10.4: 399-418.

 [8] Guimera, Roger, et al (2003). Self-similar community structure in a network of human interactions.
      Physical review E 68.6: 065103.

 [9] Vzquez, A., Pastor-Satorras, R., & Vespignani, A. (2002). Large-scale topological and dynamical prop-
      erties of the Internet. Physical Review E, 65(6), 066130.

[10] Ravasz, E., & Barabsi, A. L. (2003). Hierarchical organization in complex networks. Physical Review E,
      67(2), 026112.

[11] Mones, E., Vicsek, L., & Vicsek, T. (2012). Hierarchy measure for complex networks. PloS one, 7(3),
      e33799.

[12] Pumain, D. (Ed.). (2006). Hierarchy in natural and social sciences (Vol. 3). Springer.

[13] lane D (2006). Hierarchy, complexity, society. Dodrecht, the Netherlands: Springer. pp 81-120.

[14] Sales-Pardo, M., Guimera, R., Moreira, A. A., & Amaral, L. A. N. (2007). Extracting the hierarchical
      organization of complex systems. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(39), 15224-15229.

[15] Bassett, D. S., Greenfield, D. L., Meyer-Lindenberg, A., Weinberger, D. R., Moore, S. W., & Bullmore,
      E. T. (2010). Efficient physical embedding of topologically complex information processing networks in
      brains and computer circuits. PLoS computational biology, 6(4), e1000748.

[16] Clune, J., Mouret, J. B., & Lipson, H. (2013). The evolutionary origins of modularity. Proceedings of the
      Royal Society b: Biological sciences, 280(1755), 20122863.

[17] Lipson H (2007) Principles of modularity, regularity, and hierarchy for scalable systems. Journal of
      Biological Physics and Chemistry, 7(4):125.

[18] Wagner, G. P., Pavlicev, M., & Cheverud, J. M. (2007). The road to modularity. Nature Reviews Genetics,
      8(12), 921-931.

                                                                      29
[19] Kaiser, Marcus, Claus C. Hilgetag, and Rolf Ktter (2010). Hierarchy and dynamics of neural networks.
      Frontiers in neuroinformatics, 4.

[20] Suh, N. P. (1990). The principles of design (Vol. 990). New York: Oxford University Press.

[21] Ozaktas, H. M. (1992). Paradigms of connectivity for computer circuits and networks. Optical Engineer-
      ing, 31(7), 1563-1567.

[22] Trusina, A., Maslov, S., Minnhagen, P., & Sneppen, K. (2004). Hierarchy measures in complex networks.
      Physical review letters, 92(17), 178702.

[23] Corominas-Murtra, B., Rodrguez-Caso, C., Goi, J., & Sol, R. (2011). Measuring the hierarchy of feed-
      forward networks. Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science, 21(1), 016108.

[24] Dehmer, M., Borgert, S., & Emmert-Streib, F. (2008). Entropy bounds for hierarchical molecular net-
      works. PLoS One, 3(8), e3079.

[25] Song, C., Havlin, S., & Makse, H. A. (2006). Origins of fractality in the growth of complex networks.
      Nature Physics, 2(4), 275-281.

[26] Ryazanov, A. I. (1988). Dynamics of hierarchical systems. Physics-Uspekhi, 31(3), 286-287.

[27] Corominas-Murtra, B., Goi, J., Sol, R. V., & Rodrguez-Caso, C. (2013). On the origins of hierarchy in
      complex networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(33), 13316-13321.

[28] O'Neill, R. V. (1986). A hierarchical concept of ecosystems (Vol. 23). Princeton University Press.

[29] Wu, J., & David, J. L. (2002). A spatially explicit hierarchical approach to modeling complex ecological
      systems: theory and applications. Ecological Modelling, 153(1), 7-26.

[30] Flack, J. C., D. Erwin, T. Elliot, & D. C. Krakauer. 2013. Timescales, symmetry, and uncertainty
      reduction in the origins of hierarchy in biological systems. In Cooperation and its evolution,Cambridge:
      MIT Press

[31] Salthe, S. N. (2013). Evolving hierarchical systems: their structure and representation. Columbia Uni-
      versity Press.

[32] Pigliucci, M. (2008). Is evolvability evolvable?. Nature Reviews Genetics, 9(1), 75-82.

[33] Clune, J., Beckmann, B. E., McKinley, P. K., & Ofria, C. (2010). Investigating whether hyperneat pro-
      duces modular neural networks. In Proceedings of the 12th annual conference on Genetic and evolutionary
      computation (pp. 635-642). ACM.

[34] Paine, R. W., & Tani, J. (2005). How hierarchical control self-organizes in artificial adaptive systems.
      Adaptive Behavior, 13(3), 211-225.

[35] Huizinga, J., Mouret, J. B., & Clune, J. Evolving Neural Networks That Are Both Modular and Regular:
      HyperNeat Plus the Connection Cost Technique. In Proceedings of GECCO(pp. 1-8).

[36] Cherniak, C., Mokhtarzada, Z., Rodriguez-Esteban, R., & Changizi, K. (2004). Global optimization of
      cerebral cortex layout. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
      101(4), 1081-1086.

[37] Chen, B. L., Hall, D. H., & Chklovskii, D. B. (2006). Wiring optimization can relate neuronal structure
      and function. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 103(12),
      4723-4728.

                                                                      30
[38] Raj, A., & Chen, Y. H. (2011). The wiring economy principle: connectivity determines anatomy in the
      human brain. PloS one, 6(9), e14832.

[39] Ahn, Y. Y., Jeong, H., & Kim, B. J. (2006). Wiring cost in the organization of a biological neuronal
      network. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 367, 531-537.

[40] Laughlin, S. B., & Sejnowski, T. J. (2003). Communication in neuronal networks. Science, 301(5641),
      1870-1874.

[41] Guimera, R., A. Arenas, and A. Daz-Guilera (2001) Communication and optimal hierarchical networks.
      Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 299.1: 247-252.

[42] Herbert A. Simon. The architecture of complexity. Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society.
      1962

[43] Lenski, R. E., Ofria, C., Collier, T. C., & Adami, C. (1999). Genome complexity, robustness and genetic
      interactions in digital organisms. Nature, 400(6745), 661-664.

[44] Lenski, R. E., Ofria, C., Pennock, R. T., & Adami, C. (2003). The evolutionary origin of complex features.
      Nature, 423(6936), 139-144.

[45] C.O. Wilke, J.L. Wang, C. Ofria, R.E. Lenski, and C. Adami. Evolution of digital organisms at high
      mutation rates leads to survival of the flattest. Nature, 412(6844):331­333, 2001.

[46] C. Espinosa-Soto and A. Wagner. Specialization can drive the evolution of modularity. PLoS Computa-
      tional Biology, 6(3):e1000719, 2010.

[47] Nadav Kashtan and Uri Alon. Spontaneous evolution of modularity and network motifs. Proceedings of
      the National Academy of Sciences, 102(39):13773­13778, 2005.

[48] Nadav Kashtan, Elad Noor, and Uri Alon. Varying environments can speed up evolution. Proceedings of
      the National Academy of Sciences, 104(34):13711­13716, 2007.

[49] Alon U (2007) An introduction to systems biology: Design principles of biological circuits. Mathematical
      and computational biology series, vol. 10.

[50] Trappenberg, T. (2009). Fundamentals of computational neuroscience. Oxford University Press.

[51] Geard, N., & Wiles, J. (2005). A gene network model for developing cell lineages. Artificial Life, 11(3),
      249-267.

[52] Cully, A., Clune, J., & Mouret, J. B. (2014). Robots that can adapt like natural animals. arXiv preprint
      arXiv:1407.3501.

[53] Louf, R., Jensen, P., & Barthelemy, M. (2013). Emergence of hierarchy in cost-driven growth of spatial
      networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(22), 8824-8829.

[54] Li, G. L., Xu, X. H., Wang, B. A., Yao, Y. M., Qin, Y., Bai, S. R., ... & Hu, Y. H. (2014). Analysis of
      protein-protein interaction network and functional modules on primary osteoporosis. European journal
      of medical research, 19(1), 15.

[55] Zhang, Y., Huang, Z., Zhu, Z., Liu, J., Zheng, X., & Zhang, Y. (2014). Network analysis of ChIP-Seq
      data reveals key genes in prostate cancer. European journal of medical research, 19(1), 47.

                                                                      31
[56] Shmulevich, I., Dougherty, E. R., Kim, S., & Zhang, W. (2002). Probabilistic Boolean networks: a
      rule-based uncertainty model for gene regulatory networks. Bioinformatics, 18(2), 261-274.

[57] Albert, R. (2005). Scale-free networks in cell biology. Journal of cell science, 118(21), 4947-4957.

[58] Keane, M. A., Streeter, M. J., Mydlowec, W., Lanza, G., & Yu, J. (2006). Genetic programming IV:
      Routine human-competitive machine intelligence (Vol. 5). Springer.

[59] D. Floreano and C. Mattiussi. Floreano, D., & Mattiussi, C. (2008). Bio-inspired artificial intelligence:
      theories, methods, and technologies. MIT press.

[60] Suh, N. P. (1990). The principles of design (Vol. 990). New York: Oxford University Press.

[61] Stanley, K. O., & Miikkulainen, R. (2003). A taxonomy for artificial embryogeny. Artificial Life, 9(2),
      93-130.

[62] Hornby, Gregory S (2005). Measuring, enabling and comparing modularity, regularity and hierarchy in
      evolutionary design. Proceedings of the 2005 conference on Genetic and evolutionary computation. ACM.

[63] Clune, J., Stanley, K. O., Pennock, R. T., & Ofria, C. (2011). On the performance of indirect encoding
      across the continuum of regularity. Evolutionary Computation, IEEE Transactions on, 15(3), 346-367.

[64] Gruau, F. (1994). Automatic definition of modular neural networks. Adaptive behavior, 3(2), 151-183.

[65] Nolfi, S., & Floreano, D. (2000). Evolutionary robotics: The biology, intelligence, and technology of
      self-organizing machines. MIT press.

[66] Striedter, G. F. (2005). Principles of brain evolution. Sinauer Associates.

[67] Wagner, G. P., & Altenberg, L. (1996). Perspective: Complex adaptations and the evolution of evolv-
      ability. Evolution, 967-976.

[68] Stanley, K. O., D'Ambrosio, D. B., & Gauci, J. (2009). A hypercube-based encoding for evolving large-
      scale neural networks. Artificial life, 15(2), 185-212.

[69] Deb, K. (2001). Multi-objective optimization using evolutionary algorithms (Vol. 16). John Wiley & Sons.

[70] Mouret, J., & Doncieux, S. (2009, May). Overcoming the bootstrap problem in evolutionary robotics
      using behavioral diversity. In Evolutionary Computation, 2009. CEC'09. IEEE Congress on (pp. 1161-
      1168). IEEE.

[71] Doncieux, Stephane, and J-B. Mouret (2010) Behavioral diversity measures for Evolutionary Robotics.
      Evolutionary Computation (CEC), 2010 IEEE Congress on. IEEE.

[72] Mouret, J-B., and Stphane Doncieux (2012) Encouraging behavioral diversity in evolutionary robotics:
      An empirical study. Evolutionary computation 20.1: 91-133.

[73] Risi, S., Vanderbleek, S. D., Hughes, C. E., & Stanley, K. O. (2009, July). How novelty search escapes
      the deceptive trap of learning to learn. In Proceedings of the 11th Annual conference on Genetic and
      evolutionary computation (pp. 153-160). ACM.

[74] Chklovskii, D. B. (2004). Exact solution for the optimal neuronal layout problem. Neural computation,
      16(10), 2067-2078.

[75] Karlebach, G., & Shamir, R. (2008). Modelling and analysis of gene regulatory networks. Nature Reviews
      Molecular Cell Biology, 9(10), 770-780.

                                                                      32
[76] Kashtan, N., & Alon, U. (2005). Spontaneous evolution of modularity and network motifs. Proceedings
      of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 102(39), 13773-13778.

[77] Leicht, E. A., & Newman, M. E. (2008). Community structure in directed networks. Physical review
      letters, 100(11), 118703.

[78] Newman, M. E. (2006). Modularity and community structure in networks. Proceedings of the National
      Academy of Sciences, 103(23), 8577-8582.

                                                                      33
