Page  20 
 
Supplementary Materials 
 
(a)  Mean and relational effects of interaction terms 
In the developmental system we model, when all inte raction terms, B, are zero, changes to G have an 
effect on the mean value of the phenotypic traits ( including their sign) but not their correlation; he nce we 
refer to G as the ‘direct’ effects of the genotype on phenoty pic characters. Conversely, for a distribution 
of G elements each with a mean of zero, the effect of B is to alter the correlation of phenotypic traits b ut 
not their mean. However, as expected for general ep istatic models (and in contrast to statistical mode ls 
that keep interaction terms and mean effects separa te), whenever trait values are non-zero a change to  an 
interaction term can have both a ‘mean effect’ as w ell as a ‘relational effect’. This is important bec ause 
interaction coefficients that have no mean effect on phenotype can only be selected because of their effect 
on the shape of the distribution of phenotypes they  produce (Pavlicev, Cheverud & Wagner 2011), but 
interaction coefficients that also have a mean effe ct on phenotypes can be selected because of their m ean 
effect but nonetheless have a (systematically related) effect on the shape of the distribution of phenotypes.  
(b)  Hill-climbing model of selection  
The evolution of the population is modelled by assuming the introduction of a mutant genotype, ′ and/or  
′, being small mutations of ̅ and  , (in single copy number in a large population). Th is genotypic 
mutation uniquely determines a mutant phenotype, ∗′. In general, the probability of this mutant fixing in 
the population is proportional to the selective adv antage of that mutation. But, here we aim to provid e a 
phenomenological model of the evolution of developm ent and as such it is the direction of selection, 
rather than quantified rates, that are important (r ates will be sensitive to parameters such as magnit ude of 
selection coefficients, mutation probabilities and the number of genetic loci contributing to a quanti tative 
trait, etc. which will be case specific). According ly, it is sufficient for our purposes to assume a ‘ hill-
climbing’ model of selection (e.g., Kashtan et al. 2009), i.e., that the selection coefficient is suff iciently 
large that beneficial mutations fix and deleterious  mutations do not. In general, mutation-rate-limite d 
evolution can have qualitatively different dynamic properties to selection-intensity-limited evolution; but 
in all our experiments we find that the direction o f selection using the former agrees with analysis u sing 
the latter (Pavlicev, Cheverud & Wagner (2011), and  the stochastic nature of selection that would occu r 
with small selection coefficients  does not add to the clarity of exposition. Thus, if  the mutant genotype is 
beneficial (i.e., fitness (develop (′,	′,T )) > fitness (develop (̅, ,T )), this becomes the mean genotype of 
the population (̅(t+1)= 	′,	 (t+1) =′ ), otherwise the loss of the mutant from the popula tion leaves the 
mean genotype of the population unchanged. Only the fitness rankings of phenotypes (not the magnitudes 
of the fitnesses) are relevant for a hill-climbing selection model.  
(c)  Effect of evolved interaction terms on the shape of phenotypic distributions 
 
-0.02 0 0.02 
-0.02 
-0.01 
0
0.01 
0.02 
gene 1 
gene 2 
-0.02 0 0.02 
-0.02 
-0.01 
0
0.01 
0.02 
gene 3 
gene 4 
-0.02 0 0.02 
-0.02 
-0.01 
0
0.01 
0.02 
gene 2 
gene 3 
-0.02 0 0.02 
-0.02 
-0.01 
0
0.01 
0.02 
gene 5 
gene 6 
a) b) c) d) 
 
Fig. S1 : The effect of evolved regulatory interactions (af ter 10,000 generations) on the correlation of expre ssion 
(Experiment 1, target, S = ++---+-+ ); for a pair of genes that are selected together  S12 = ++ (a), S34 = -- (b), or 
selected contrariwise, S23 = +- (c), S56 = -+ (d). Each point in each distribution shows the  expression levels of two 
genes from a phenotype developed using the evolved regulatory interactions. Each phenotype is develope d from a 
random G drawn from a uniform distribution. 
Page  21 
 
Figure S1 confirms that the correlation of characte rs in the phenotypic distribution produced by the 
evolved developmental interactions agrees with the direction of selection experienced on those two 
characters in the selective environment. 
(d)  The cumulative effect of many small mutations under directional selection. 
Under directional  selection, the cumulative effect of a large number  of small mutations is equivalent to 
the effect of a small number of large mutations whe n controlling for variance. When the time for G to 
stabilise after a change in environment is small co mpared to the number of generations after it stabil ises 
before the next change in environment, we can there fore model the effect of natural selection in any o ne 
selective environment as follows. For each element of B (in random order without replacement) we test 
for both positive and negative directional selectio n by applying hill-climbing selection on two mutati ons, 
one drawn from a distribution with mean q, the other with mean – q, each with standard deviation . 
Under directional selection, at most one of these m utations will be retained by selection. Experiments  3 
and 4 use q=0.02 and q=0.005, respectively. In both cases we use a standard deviation =0.01 q.  
A standard deviation of 1% of the mean simulates th e cumulative effect of 10 
4 discrete mutations 
(each with equal probability of being positive or n egative) occurring before each change in environmen t 
(coming from  ==>1 − 	,  = 0.5	). Naturally, there is a trade-off in these experim ents between 
how many mutations occur before each change in envi ronment and how many changes in environment 
are simulated in total. If the latter is increased,  the former can be decreased, but this requires sim ulating 
more mutation-selection cycles. Here we find that 40 changes in environment is sufficient for Experiment 
3 whereas Experiment 4 uses lower mutation magnitud es and 800 changes in environment (on average, 
100 presentations of each training pattern). This l ow mutation rate enables the evolution of the 16 
phenotypic attractors without ‘over-fitting’ to the 8 target patterns (see section (f)).   
(e)  Developmental switching – abrupt change in phenotype from linear change in genotype 
 
Fig. S2: Quantified detail of Fig.3.f. – match of G and adult phenotypes to targets S1  and S2 . 
In an experiment where G varies systematically from S1  to S2  in steps of 5% (Fig. 3.f), note that as G 
changes slowly from S1  to S2  the adult phenotype switches abruptly from S1  to S2 . 
 
(f)  Generalisation and evolvability 
Any kind of canalisation seems to oppose the possib ility that a developmental representation can be 
primed to produce phenotypic patterns that are genu inely new. However evolved correlations – or more 
exactly, the restrained application of evolved corr elations – can facilitate evolutionary novelty in a  
quantifiable sense. Specifically, we can use knowle dge of neural network learning to understand the 
affordances and limitations of enhanced evolvability to produce outputs that are new. Here we equate t he 
selective environment that the evolving GRN has alr eady been exposed to with the training set  of the 
learning neural network. High fitness in these selective environments corresponds to high performance on 
the training set. Whereas, the ability to evolve hi gh fitness phenotypes in new  selective environments is 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 
200 
400 
600 
800 
1000 
1200 
1400 
1600 
characters matching target 
G varies from S1 to S2 (%) 
 
 
G match to S1 
Adult match to S1 
Adult match to S2 
Page  22 
 
analogous to the ability of a well-trained neural n etwork to generalise  to an unseen test set . For example, 
in Experiment 3, the ‘training set’, contains 8 patterns but we observe that the network is predispose d to 
create 16 phenotypic patterns, not just these 8.  
 This type of generalisation is not to be taken for  granted, however, even when the training set contains 
the structural patterns that are representative of the general class. The problem is that the training  set, 
being only a subset of the general class, necessari ly also contains other structural patterns that you  do not 
want the system to learn if it is to provide good g eneralisation. A learner may in some cases learn th e 
specific patterns of the training set and thereby f ail to generalise to the test set. This is called over-fitting  
(Rumelhart et al. 1986). In general, the difficult part of machine learning is not the task of getting  high 
performance on the training set but the task of get ting good generalisation on the test set. The issue  is 
exacerbated if the model space is particularly ‘exp ressive’ or high-dimensional (as is necessary for 
complex learning tasks). In this case the model spa ce will be highly under-constrained  – meaning that 
there are many ways to represent the training set p erfectly. Unfortunately, most of these solutions do  not 
generalise well; so the task of finding general sol utions is all the more difficult when the model spa ce is 
high-dimensional.  
 Note that any kind of generalisation is equivalent  to a ‘failure’ of a memory to represent only  the 
training set. One solution to over-fitting is there fore to limit the complexity of the model space suc h that 
the learning system can only attain high fitness on  the training set by finding general solutions; in other 
words, such that it does not have the capacity to l earn the patterns by rote. In neural network models , 
model complexity is sometimes controlled by adding a penalty for each neural connection that is used 
(O’Reilly & Munakata 2000). Similarly, Clune, Moure t & Lipson (2013) add a cost to connections and 
observed improved evolvability, and Kashtan, Noor & Alon (2007) simply limit the number of logic gates 
a solution can use. In the current work, the traini ng set of Experiment 3 has no (pairwise) correlatio ns 
between modules and thus there is nothing for the G RN to learn. Or more exactly, there is no structure  
that the GRN is capable  of learning. 
 2  
 In the context of neural learning, when a memory i s formed that was not in the training set this is 
sometimes referred to as a “spurious memory”. But spurious memories can also be interpreted as a simple 
form of generalisation – producing a pattern that c ontains features of several different training patt erns 
(Watson, Buckley & Mills 2009, Watson, Mills & Buckley 2010, Jang, Kim & Lee 1992). In some cases, 
this generalisation ability has the effect of ident ifying meso-scale features that are common to many 
patterns and putting them together in new combinati ons. This can create a genuinely new pattern that i s 
substantially different from any of the training pa tterns, and yet contains features that resemble sub -
patterns observed in multiple training patterns (Wa tson, Mills & Buckley 2010), as illustrated in 
Experiment 3. It is no coincidence that this kind o f generalisation involves modules. Consider two tra its 
in different modules; If generalisation is to be pe rmitted then the GRN must not enforce a correlation  
between these two traits. In fact, for any  two traits in different modules, the GRN knows nothing  about 
what combinations of traits are fit. Accordingly, t he only way for the GRN to know anything  about past 
selective environments (whilst still allowing some traits to vary independently) is for it to learn 
correlations in approximately disjoint subsets. Lea rning correlations within modules usefully restrict s the 
phenotypes that are produced, but learning correlations between modules opposes generalisation.  
 Note that learning the correlations within modules  improves performance on the training set, but the 
only advantage of not  learning the correlations between modules, allowing modules to vary independently 
of one another, is for improving generalisation and  performance on the test set. This suggests that th e 
selective pressures on learning what things go toge ther are quite different from the selective pressur e to 
learn what things to keep separate (‘parcelation’ r ather than ‘integration’; Wagner & Altenberg, 1996) . 
This perspective indicates that the challenge for u nderstanding the evolution of evolvability is close ly 
related to the difficulty of learning general models from data – i.e., overcoming the problem of over-fitted 
                                                      
2 In Experiment 3, the number of loops in the traini ng patterns represent odd parity  – i.e., the training samples have 
1 or 3 modules. Odd parity is a generalisation of X OR (logical Exclusive OR) to multiple inputs that f amously 
cannot be solved by local pairwise interactions. Si nce the developmental network can represent pairwis e 
correlations, but not higher-order correlations, it  cannot learn this set of training patterns without  also producing 
patterns with 0, 2 and 4 loops. 
Page  23 
 
solutions that give high-performance on the trainin g set but fail to generalise to unseen test cases. And 
more specifically, the capability of expressive of G-P mappings to represent complex structural patterns is 
balanced by their tendency to over-fit to the past and thus fail to generalise to future selective 
environments.  
 Nonetheless, the equivalence between developmental  memory and associative learning demonstrated 
in the current paper indicates that the evolution o f a G-P mapping can provide substantive adaptive 
advantages in quite general scenarios. For example,  the capability of recurrent neural networks to fin d 
locally optimal solutions to constraint optimisatio n problems (Hopfield & Tank 1986) is well known and  
associative learning can improve this ability (Wats on, Buckley & Mills 2010, Watson, Mills & Buckley 
2011). Specifically, associative learning can impro ve the ability of a network to find high-quality 
solutions even when the problem has only ‘accidenta l’ structure rather than an explicit modular 
decomposition (Watson, Buckley & Mills 2011). But the advantage is much more pronounced when there 
is modular structure that can be exploited (especia lly if the G-P map changes the variational 
neighbourhood, enabling large but controlled variat ion in phenotype space) (Watson, Mills & Buckley 
2011, Mills 2010, Mills & Watson 2009, Mills & Wats on submitted). The potential for evolution by 
natural selection, given developmental processes with suitable heritable variation, to exhibit such adaptive 
capabilities suggests that the evolution of evolvab ility may alter the adaptive capabilities of natura l 
selection in a substantial manner; and, perhaps mor e importantly, the application of a machine learnin g 
framework enables us to quantify and understand the affordances and limitations of this ability (Watson et 
al. 2010a). 
 
(g)  Modularly varying environments produces modular structure in the interaction network 
In Experiment 3 in the main text the two patterns in each module are arbitrary, not the complement of one 
another, and different patterns are used in each mo dule (e.g., different rotations of loops). The char acters 
that correspond to a block are also not continuous in the linear genome G (there is nothing about the 
experiment that is sensitive to this ordering of the phenotypic characters 
3). This serves to illustrate that the 
result does not require special symmetries. Here we  provide an additional experiment, analogous to 
Experiment 3, but with more transparent modularity that can be easily verified by inspecting B. We 
studied 8 target phenotypes, each of which is composed of 16 characters, divided into four groups of f our 
(Fig. S3.a). The four characters within each group only appear in the set of target patterns as either  ---- or 
++++. Four of these sub-patterns are combined to create a complete training pattern of 16 characters such 
that each target pattern contains one module of the  “++++” type and the remainder are of the “----” ty pe 
or vice versa.  
Figure S3.b-c shows that the evolved correlations c learly identify the strong correlations amongst the  
genes within each module as predicted by Hebb’s rul e. We then examine the distribution of adult 
phenotypes produced from these evolved correlations  (Fig. S3.d-e). We see that development reproduces 
only well-formed modules (i.e., the traits within e ach module match either ‘++++’ or ‘----‘), but that in 
addition to the target phenotypes, the adult phenot ypes also exhibit other patterns produced by new 
combinations of those modules. In fact, all 16 poss ible combinations of the four modules are exhibited  in 
the distribution of adult phenotypes (not just the 8 in the training set). In this simple example we c an see 
the modularity in B (Fig. S3.b) (representing the fact that there are strong correlations between traits in 
the same module and no evolved correlations between  traits in different modules) that thus allows new 
combinations of modules to be produced by development. 
 
                                                      
3 The ability of development to produce novel phenot ypes via new combinations of developmental modules is 
closely analogous to the ability of sexual recombin ation to produce novel genotypes via new combinatio ns of 
genetic building blocks (Watson, Weinreich & Wakele y 2011), and the test case used here is structurall y equivalent. 
However, the success of sexual recombination requir es that genetic linkage corresponds with epistatic dependencies, 
whereas here useful modules can be identified and r eproduced in new combinations regardless of the ord ering of 
traits in the target phenotypes. 
Page  24 
 
 
Fig. S3:  Interaction coefficients evolved in modularly vary ing selective environment (9.6·10 
6 generations) and 
resultant phenotypes. a) The set of modularly varyi ng target phenotypes. b) Evolved interaction coeffi cients. c) 
Hebbian interaction matrix summed over the 8 patter ns. Evolved within-module interactions are positive  and 
between-module interactions are approximately zero,  exactly as expected under Hebbian learning. d) 30 example 
adult phenotypes developed from uniformly random G. Note that these include patterns that are not in the target set. 
e) Distributions of phenotype patterns; ‘Targets’ h ave either 4 or 12 positive traits. ‘Without regula tion’ shows the 
frequency positive traits in G. For this figure only, G is are generated to be uniformly distributed in number of positive 
characters [0,16]; ‘With regulation’ shows the freq uency ‘+’ traits in the adult phenotype patterns de veloped with the 
evolved interaction coefficients. Note that the phe notypes produced include the target patterns (with one or three 
blocks of positive traits) but also all other combinations of modules (with zero, two and four blocks of positive traits). 
(h)  Brief investigation of robustness to environmental noise 
Each row is a sample of 10 phenotypes (as per Fig. 3.d) but each row shows the effect of environmental  
perturbation ( in this extreme case, a full randomisation of the va lues of P) at progressively later time 
steps of development. For example, when environment  affects P only 3 time steps from the end of 
development, the adult phenotype (at time step 10) is unable to recover either of the target phenotype s 
accurately.   
However, note that since there are only two phenoty pic attractors in this developmental system, and an y 
G leads to either one or the other (Fig. 3.d), if de velopment were allowed to continue for additional t ime 
steps after an environmental perturbation, in every case it will eventually equilibrate at one or other of the 
two targets as before. In these experiments we are interpreting environmental perturbation simplistically; 
a) we are investigating whether an adult phenotype can recover from an environmental perturbation not 
whether a phenotype can resist environmental pertur bation in the first place, b) here we are also not 
investigating what happens when environmental perturbation of the phenotype is partial. 
(i)  Robustness without reducing phenotypic variability 
An evolved developmental process with appropriate f lexibility may enable the recovery of high-fitness 
phenotypes quickly and reliably after a change in e nvironment. The converse is also true, however; the  
ability of a population to evolve a particular phen otype may be retarded by a developmental process th at 
does not produce appropriate phenotypic variation. This has some relevance to the apparent tension 
between evolvability and robustness. That is, the c onservative and myopic quality of natural selection  
favours developmental canalisation and robustness w hich seems intrinsically opposed to an increase in 
phenotypic variability or evolvability. Some view t hese notions as two-sides of the same coin (Kirchne r 
& Gerhart 1998, Draghi et al. 2010, Brigandt 2007);  i.e., a predisposition to evolve some phenotypes 
more readily goes hand in hand with a decrease in the propensity to produce other phenotypes. Indeed, the 

Page  25 
 
regulatory connections that evolve in our model do not evolve because they increase the speed of futur e 
evolution, although they do, but rather because, in  the immediate term, they increase the strength wit h 
which the current phenotype is expressed.  
 
Time  step  of   
perturbation   
 
1 
 
2 
 
3 
 
4 
 
5 
 
6 
 
7 
 
8 
 
9 
 
10 
 
  
Fig. S4: Example phenotypes at developmental time step 10, after an environmental perturbation (randomisation) to 
the developing gene expression pattern at successiv ely later developmental time steps (each image is a n 
independent simulation, 10 examples for each perturbation period).  
 
 A multi-dimensional concept of variability, includ ing correlated variability, provides a more 
sophisticated appreciation of the manner by which c analisation might oppose or facilitate evolvability . 
For example, if robustness is increased by canalisa tion applied uniformly in all dimensions then that 
would oppose evolvability. But there are (at least)  two other possibilities. i) An increase in robustn ess 
might occur by reducing variability in some traits whilst leaving others free to vary; focussing the 
remaining variability on more useful dimensions. This partly alleviates the apparent tension of robustness 
and evolvability. ii) But more interestingly, evolved correlations, uniquely, can reduce the dimensionality 
of phenotype space by reducing the combinations  of traits that occur in phenotypes, without reduci ng 
phenotypic variability in any individual  phenotypic characters. For example, the two phenot ypes ++ 
and -- constitute only half of the four possible phenotypes composed of two bi-allelic characters, but each 
individual trait can still take either value + or -  (this is the developmental analogue of altering th e linkage 
disequilibrium of simultaneously segregating allele s without altering allele frequencies/fixing allele s at 
either locus). Limiting character combinations without limiting the variability of the individual characters 
alleviates the tension between robustness and evolvability in a more profound sense.  
 The logic functions IFF and XOR correspond to posi tive and negative correlation, respectively. These 
functions are significant in machine learning becau se the output is not a linearly decomposable functi on 
of the inputs (McClelland & Rumelhart 1986). It is necessary to learn correlations to represent these 
functions, and representing these functions is necessary to produce a memory that can store more than one 
pattern without simply blending them. Simpler types  of canalisation, e.g. from a linear developmental 
process, preclude this possibility (as illustrated in Figs. 3.h & 4.d). 
 

Page  26 
 
(j)  Recall from partial stimuli showing developmental time 
 
Fig. S5: An evolved gene regulation network exhibits a developmental memory of phenotypes that have been 
selected for in the past.  The gene network was evolved in an environment whe re selection varies between two 
target phenotypes; an image of Charles Darwin and a n image of Donald Hebb (the neuropsychologist from whom 
Hebbian learning takes its name). Each pixel in the  image corresponds to the expression level of a gen e. The 
evolved network of regulatory interactions introduc es phenotypic correlations that create developmenta l attractors 
corresponding to these two phenotypes. We find that  this is functionally equivalent to the manner in w hich a neural 
network learns an associative memory of a set of tr aining patterns via Hebbian learning. This experime nt shows that 
if the genotype, controlling the embryonic phenotype, partially resembles one of the targets, development ‘recognises’ 
which phenotype it belongs to and recreates the com plete adult phenotype in a self-consistent manner. The 
development of ten example individuals from differe nt genotypes (a-j) are shown over ten developmental  time steps.  
In most cases development produces an adult phenotype that fully resembles only one of the phenotypes selected in 
the past. In cases where the genotype is almost equ ally matched to both phenotypes (e.g. g and h) the process of 
development breaks this symmetry, producing an adult phenotype that largely resembles only one, but some residual 
trace of the other phenotype is visible late into developmental time. 
See main text for references. 
 
individual  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10  
developmental time  
a)  
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
f) 
g) 
h) 
i) 
j) 
adult  
phenotype 
genotype =  
embryonic phenotype 