
===== S1 PAGE 1 =====
1
How evolution learns to generalise: Using the principles of
learning theory to understand the evolution of developmental
organisation.
Kostas Kouvaris1,∗, Jeff Clune 2, Loizos Kounios 1, Markus Brede 1, Richard A. Watson1
1 ECS, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK
2 University of Wyoming, Laramie, Wyoming, USA
∗ E-mail: kk6g11@soton.ac.uk
Supporting Information
Supporting Figures
Fig A. The underlying correlational structure of the class and the training set. (Top)
Hinton diagram of the variance-covariance matrix and phenotypic distribution of all potential future
phenotypic targets. The true underlying structure of the given problem set which is comprised of all 8
possible phenotypic targets is described by the block diagonal interaction matrix. Accordingly, the traits
within each module that encode for each functional part of the organism (e.g., front wings) are strongly
correlated with each other (positively or negatively depending on the combination of signs in the
particular phenotypic pattern used), and no correlations between one module and another (e.g., the
production of halteres is functionally independent from the production of front wings). (Bottom) Hinton
diagram of the variance-covariance matrix and phenotypic distribution of past phenotypic targets. The
structure of the training set which is comprised of 3 phenotypic targets is described by an interaction
matrix with non-zero off-diagonal elements. Those elements correspond to spurious correlations that
describe functional phenotypic dependencies between modules that are present in the past selected
phenotypic targets (e.g., the production of front wings is positively correlated with the production of
antennas). Such developmental structures will appropriately represent the 3 past selected targets, but fail
to generate all 8 phenotypes from the class. The colour and the size of the squares in Hinton’s
representation indicate the sign and the magnitude of the respective correlations.

===== S1 PAGE 2 =====
2
Fig B. The evolution of phenotypic distribution for moderate environmental switching.
Pictorial representation of the phenotypic distributions induced by the evolving developmental process
over evolutionary time for moderate environmental switching. Green circles indicate past selected targets,
while red circles indicate previously-unseen phenotypes from the same phenotype family as the past ones.
Phenotypes outside of the class are represented by distorted mosaic images. The size of the insect-like
creatures indicates the propensity of development to express the respective phenotype. At the beginning
(epoch 0), development equally predisposes the production of all possible phenotypic patterns (here 2 12),
i.e., no developmental biases. The evolving developmental structure initially starts canalising only
phenotypes from the class. After epoch 25 however it further canalises the production of past selected
phenotypes, by reducing the propensity of producing those phenotypes from the class that were not
selected in the past, i.e., over-fitting.

===== S1 PAGE 3 =====
3
Fig C. F ast and Slow Environmental Switching F ail to Evolve Developmental Memory .
The match between phenotypic distributions and the selective environments the network has been
exposed to (training error) and all selective environments (generalisation error) against different
environmental switching intervals (K). The insets illustrate the Hinton diagram of the evolved interaction
matrix for each regime (indicated by different background colour) and the respective phenotypic
distribution induced by the evolved developmental process.
Fig D. Entropy of the phenotypic distribution reduces over evolutionary time. Shannon
entropy [1] of the phenotypic distribution induced by the evolving developmental process for moderate
environmental switching and sparse connectivity. Overfitting is indicated by reducing to less than four
bits. For the case of sparse connectivity entropy converges to four bits indicating that each of the four
modules vary independently. The sample size was 5 × 105.

===== S1 PAGE 4 =====
4
Developmental Model
Following previous work [2], we describe the development of the embryonic phenotype to an adult
phenotype by a continuous, non-linear and recurrent (i.e., it allows for feed-back connections) model of
gene-regulatory networks [3,4].
At each developmental time step, t, the phenotype of an individual organism is characterised by a
collection of phenotypic traits, Pt =⟨pt,1,...,p t,N⟩, where pt,i∈ R,∀i. The genotype is comprised of two
parts: the direct effects on the embryonic phenotypic traits, Gt =⟨gt,1,...,g t,N⟩, where gt,i∈{− 1, 1},∀i
and the regulatory interactions between the genes, bij, that determine the dynamical developmental
process [5,15,16]. The regulatory interactions are represented by the matrix B.
The dynamics of the expression level for each gene depend on 1) the gene expression levels of the
genes that is connected to and 2) the its pattern of connections, i.e., how strongly the respective gene is
connected to its neighbouring genes. In the first time step, the embryonic phenotype is solely characterised
by the direct effects of G (P0 =G). Thereafter, at every developmental step the phenotypic traits are
developed under the following set of difference equations [2,8]:
pt+1,i =pt,i +τ1σ(
∑
j
bijpt,j)−τ2pt,i, (1)
where τ1 = 1 and τ2 = 0.2 indicate the maximal expression rate and the constant rate of degradation of
the given gene product respectively. The second term in the right-hand side of equation (1) corresponds
to the interaction term, the activity of which is limited by a non-linear, monotonic and bounded (sigmoid)
activation function, σ(x) =tanh(αx), where α = 0.5. Then, over a fixed number of developmental time
steps, T (here T = 10), the embryonic phenotype is transformed into an adult phenotype, Pa =PT , upon
which selection can act. Both G and B are initialised at zero.
Varying Selective Environments
In this work, a set of related phenotypic targets is considered from the same family (as in [2, 9]). This
guarantees that the environment changes in a systematic manner (i.e., shares common regularities invariant
over time) — something which is ubiquitous in natural environments.
Since we are interested in modelling phenotypic variability, traits that are under constant selection are
omitted from our model. We choose a simple family of modularly-varying targets. Modularity is widespread
in the natural world and provides a simple way to test for generalised developmental oragnisations that
are biological relevant [10–16]. For simplicity, to model selection that varies in a modular manner, we
assume an extreme form of modularity, namely separable modules [17]. Accordingly, selection on any trait
is strongly interdependent with selection on other traits in the same module, but independent of selection
on traits in other modules. Specifically, when a change in the environment occurs, if the direction of
selection on a given trait changes, the direction of selection on all other traits in the same module also
changes (this defines the modules). Selection thus favours two complementary states for each module
that confer high fitness in different environments. Since the selection on each module is independent
of selection on other modules, this means that there are 2 k possible high-fitness phenotypes, where k
corresponds to the number of modules.
Here we assume a class of phenotypes consisted of equal sized modules (4 modules of 4 phenotypic traits
each). The particular patterns chosen are irrelevant. So we pick one phenotype of 16 traits arbitrarily,
here (− +− +−− + +− + +−−−−− ), and divide it into 4 equal modules (i.e., ( − +−+), (−− ++),
(− + +−) and (−−−− )). Accordingly, for the phenotypic patterns that belong in the class, each module
(block) can have 2 states: A or B; denoting a particular phenotypic sub-pattern or sub-goal (e.g., here the
sub-goal for the first module can be either ( − +−+) (A) or (+− +−) (B)). The class is thus comprised
of 16 different modular patterns; all possible combinations of the sub-patterns (blocks) (see Fig A in S3
Appendix).

===== S1 PAGE 5 =====
5
Fig A. Modularly-varying environment. Target phenotypes varying from one another in a
modular fashion. Each target phenotype consists of 4 modules of 4 phenotypic traits (i.e., 16 phenotypic
traits in total). Each module can take two (complementary) states: A or B; denoting particular
sub-patterns favoured by selection in different selective environments. The complete set of phenotypes is
thus comprised of 2 4 = 16 phenotypes, differing from one another in a modular fashion. The signs of
phenotypic traits correspond to the direction favoured by selection in a given environment. Eight of the
16 possible phenotypes are designated as the target class (the other eight are merely the complement of a
pattern already in the target class). For the main experiments, three patterns from the target class are
used as ‘training’ patterns, i.e., selected for.
The time-invariant regularities here are the correlations between traits within any one module. The
actual underlying structure of the given problem can thus be described by the block diagonal interaction
matrix (see Fig A in S1 Appendix). The colour and the size of the squares in Hinton’s representation
indicate the sign and the magnitude of each correlation respectively. This clearly shows that selection on
the traits within each module are strongly correlated with each other (positively or negatively depending
on the combination of signs in the particular phenotypic pattern used), and no correlations between one
module and another.

===== S1 PAGE 6 =====
6
Complementary patterns here are also stable states of the evolved dynamical system as a result of
Equation 1. The map described in Equation 1 is an odd function (i.e., symmetric with respect to the
origin) since f(−x) =−f(x). Accordingly, if R is a stable state of the system, i.e., R =f(R), then−R is
also stable since−R =−f(R) =f(−R). In order to focus on the more interesting (non-trivial) attractors
that may arise, we limit the phenotypic space so as to ignore complementary targets (i.e., thus removing 8
of the patterns). Specifically, without loss of generality, we consider the phenotypic targets in which the
sub-pattern in the last slot (trait positions:13 − 16) corresponds to state A: {−,−,−,−}, i.e., we focus on
the top-half of the class as arranged in the lower part of Fig 1. Accordingly, each member of the other
half of the class is the bit-wise complement of a member in the top half.
In this work, we want to examine the ability of the developmental system to ‘learn’ from past selective
environments and generalise to new environments by producing novel phenotypes within the same class.
Accordingly, to assay generalisation and the conditions that promote it, the population is evolved by
exposure to a limited number of selective environments ( < 8, i.e., a strict sub-set of the class). Otherwise,
generalisation would not be relevant, since the population would have been exposed to all possible selective
environments (i.e., all phenotypes in the class are presented). For this paper, we use the following example
from this problem domain as a training set:
S1 ={−, +,−, +},{−,−, +, +},{−, +, +,−},{−,−,−,−}.
S2 ={−, +,−, +},{+, +,−,−},{+,−,−, +},{−,−,−,−}.
S3 ={+,−, +,−},{+, +,−,−},{−, +, +,−},{−,−,−,−}.
(2)
In Favouring Sparse Connectivity in Different Training Sets, we explore sensitivity to this particular
choice by examining generalisation from training on all possible proper subsets of the class.
The Structure of Developmental Organisation
Here we show how costly interactions and noisy environments facilitate the emergence of more general and
parsimonious developmental models. For this purpose, we monitor the evolution of regulatory interactions
over evolutionary time in each evolutionary setting. The regulatory coefficients here correspond to the
free parameters of the developmental model that determine the functional organisation of development.
We first analyse the evolution of regulatory coefficients in the control scenario, i.e., moderate rate of
environmental change. Fig A A in S4 Appendix shows that the ontogenetic interactions evolved under
natural selection to reflect the correlations in the previously-experienced selective environments. As seen,
the Hinton diagram of the evolved regulatory matrix appropriately matched the variance-covariance matrix
of the past phenotypic targets (Fig A in S4 Appendix). The colour and the size of the squares in Hinton’s
representation indicate the sign and the magnitude of the respective correlations.
Yet natural selection did not directly select either for correlations, or for matching the exploration
distribution to the fitness distribution of the phenotypic variants (i.e., training error minimisation).
Natural selection selected for immediate fitness differences depending on how well adapted the organism
was to its current selective environment; i.e., how close the produced adult phenotype was to the respective
target phenotype. The evaluation of the developmental process performed here against the training and
the test set was a post hoc analysis, and hence not part of the actual evolutionary dynamics.
In the same fashion as the nervous system [18], evolution does not try to analyse anything. It just
tries to generate appropriate behaviour. The observed (correlation) learning behaviour of evolution can
be seen as a by-product of developmental systems’ effort to produce high-fitness phenotypic variants in
varied selective environments — optimise the actual functionality of the system. The system does not
explicitly aim at inferring the target function, namely, the ideal G-P map that gives rise to proper system
functionality in long-term (over certain genetic and environmental conditions). Nevertheless, we see that
under certain conditions the system may discover a hypothesis (i.e., set of regulatory coefficients) closer
to the target function, by producing phenotypic variants that are fitter in short term.

===== S1 PAGE 7 =====
7
Fig A. Evolution of regulatory coefficients in noisy environments and under parsimony
pressure. The evolution of regulatory coefficients over evolutionary time and the Hinton diagram of the
evolved regulatory coefficients (after epoch 150) for (A) moderate environmental switching, (B) noisy
environments, (C) favouring weak connectivity and (D) favouring sparse connectivity. The vertical dashed
line denotes when the ad-hoc technique of early stopping is used, i.e., the moment the problem of
over-fitting begins. Favouring sparsity ignores the weak spurious correlations of the finite sampling noise
and maintains the time-invariant ones.
Fig A B in S4 Appendix shows that under the presence of environmental noise, the regulatory
interactions evolved towards smaller in magnitude weights. In particular, we observe that the rate of
evolutionary change was decreased with evolutionary time giving rise to a plateau in the test error in Fig
3 B. The set of evolved regulatory coefficients here corresponds to the one we get if we stopped evolution
the moment over-fitting begins, i.e., at the vertical dashed line in Fig 3 A. From Hinton diagram we can
see that the relative importance between strong and weak correlations remained the same as in the case of
the control run, i.e., only the magnitudes changed. Therefore, noise had a beneficial role on the evolution
of genetic structures by making it difficult for natural selection to find configurations that over-fit past
phenotypic targets.
We observe similar results for the evolution of regulatory interactions under the pressure for weak
connectivity (Fig A C in S4 Appendix). In contrast to environmental stochasticity, however, favouring
weak connectivity imposes strict constraints on the evolution of regulatory coefficients that prohibit them
from growing bigger, i.e., providing a hard bound determined by the strength of parsimony pressure (see
below). Accordingly, the regulatory coefficients initially increased until they reached a level that the
further increase in the reproduction and maintenance cost of interactions was greater than the benefit of
the developmental structure. Moreover, when properly tuned favouring weak connectivity exhibits the
same behaviour as stopping early. Favouring weak connectivity ( L2-regularisation) can be understood as
imposing inductive biases (i.e., additional constraints) in the evolution of regulatory interactions, punishing
interactions (parameters) with extreme (high) magnitudes by applying a penalty proportional to their
current magnitudes (as in weight-decay).
Lastly, Fig A D in S4 Appendix illustrates how favouring sparse connectivity can exhibit a form
of feature selection emphasising the relative importance of the strong correlations against the weak
correlations. Specifically, we see that only the strongest (time-invariant) correlations persisted, while

===== S1 PAGE 8 =====
8
Fig A. Favouring sparse connectivity enhances phenotypic generalisation. (A) Phenotypic generalisation
with and without the parsimony pressure for sparsity ( L1-regularisation) against all possible evolutionary
scenarios (training sets), i.e., all possible combinations of distinct past selective environments drawn from
the class. (B) Means and error bars of the generalisation performance of the evolved networks with and
without the parsimony pressure for sparsity against different numbers of previously experienced selective
environments. The cost of connection significantly enhanced evolvability in the majority of the cases. The
interaction matrices here were determined using Hebb’s rule.
the weak (spurious) correlations, which arose as a result of the sampling process, were eliminated
over evolutionary time. The strong correlations here (i.e., the block diagonal of the interaction matrix)
correspond to the actual underlying modular structure of the environmental variation that remain invariant
over time. Consequently, if the strength of parsimony pressure is large enough to ignore the spurious
correlations, the evolved associations are (almost) identical to the variance-covariance matrix that describes
the phenotypes family (see Fig A in S4 Appendix). Favouring sparse connectivity ( L1-regularisation) can
be understood as punishing interactions by equally applying a fixed penalty to all of the weights of the
network. The amount of reduction is controlled by the hyper-parameter λ (see below); the higher its
value, the higher the penalty applied, and hence the higher the level of sparsity. When properly tuned,
favouring sparse connectivity leads to many zero weights, and thus the complexity of the model is reduced
by removing degrees of freedom.
Favouring Sparse Connectivity in Different Training Sets
Experiments were also carried out for every possible training set as a strict sub-set of the test set.
Firstly, all possible combinations, ∑
0≤k≤N
(N
k
)
= 2N, were explicitly enumerated, where N indicates the
number of patterns in the test set. Then, the respective developmental systems were determined following
Hebb’s rule with and without the selective pressure on the cost of connections (for optimal λ values).
Hebbian learning was used here for computational tractability (65536 possible combinations), since it has
been shown before that the interaction matrix evolves under natural selection in a Hebbian manner [2].
According to Hebb’s rule, the pair-wise interactions are increased (or decreased) if the phenotypic traits
are aligned (or not). The Hebbian matrix can be computed by computing the outer-product over the
training inputs, i.e., the auto-correlation matrix. For the sake of comparison, the respective coefficient
matrices were also tuned to be of the same average magnitude level as in the experiments above. These
simulations allow us to draw some more general conclusions.
Overall, we find that the cost of connection significantly enhanced evolvability in the majority of
the cases (Fig A in S5 Appendix). As the number of observations is increased we observe an increase

===== S1 PAGE 9 =====
9
on average in evolvability, reaching zero generalisation error when k =N, even without incorporating
the cost of connection. Interestingly, this was also true for some cases of 4, 8 and 12 patterns. We
therefore see that different training sets entailed different information about the class, some of which were
better representatives than others. For training sets consisted of more than half of the patterns in the
class, we also observe that (optimally tuned) parsimony pressure for sparsity certainly resulted in perfect
generalisation. On the other hand, in situations like the ones of 1 or 2 patterns the parsimony pressure
had no effect on the generalisation performance of the network, and in some situations between 3 to 8
patterns it had little effect.
Acknowledgments
No data sets are associated with this publication.
References
1. Shannon CE. A mathematical theory of communication. ACM SIGMOBILE Mobile Computing
and Communications Review. 2001;5(1):3–55.
2. Watson RA, Wagner GP, Pavlicev M, Weinreich DM, Mills R. The Evolution of Phenotypic
Correlations and Developmental Memory. Evolution. 2014;68(4):1124–1138.
3. Vohradsk´ y J. Neural model of the genetic network. Journal of Biological Chemistry.
2001;276(39):36168–36173.
4. Vohradsk´ y J. Neural network model of gene expression. The FASEB Journal. 2001;15(3):846–854.
5. Wagner GP. The biological homology concept. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics. 1989; p.
51–69.
6. Lipson H, Pollack JB, Suh NP. On the origin of modular variation. Evolution. 2002;56(8):1549–1556.
7. Kashtan N, Mayo AE, Kalisky T, Alon U. An analytically solvable model for rapid evolution of
modular structure. PLoS computational biology. 2009;5(4):e1000355.
8. Wessels LF, van Someren EP, Reinders MJ, et al. A comparison of genetic network models. In:
pacific Symposium on Biocomputing. vol. 6; 2001. p. 508–519.
9. Parter M, Kashtan N, Alon U. Facilitated variation: how evolution learns from past environments
to generalize to new environments. PLoS Computational Biology. 2008;4(11):e1000206.
10. Clune J, Mouret JB, Lipson H. The evolutionary origins of modularity. Proceedings of the Royal
Society b: Biological sciences. 2013;280(1755):20122863.
11. Callebaut W, Rasskin-Gutman D. Modularity: understanding the development and evolution of
natural complex systems. MIT press; 2005.
12. Carroll SB. Chance and necessity: the evolution of morphological complexity and diversity. Nature.
2001;409(6823):1102–1109.
13. Alon U. An introduction to systems biology: design principles of biological circuits. CRC press;
2006.

===== S1 PAGE 10 =====
10
14. Wagner GP, Pavlicev M, Cheverud JM. The road to modularity. Nature Reviews Genetics.
2007;8(12):921–931.
15. Lipson H, Pollack JB, Suh NP. On the origin of modular variation. Evolution. 2002;56(8):1549–1556.
16. Kashtan N, Mayo AE, Kalisky T, Alon U. An analytically solvable model for rapid evolution of
modular structure. PLoS computational biology. 2009;5(4):e1000355.
17. Watson RA. Compositional evolution: the impact of sex, symbiosis and modularity on the gradualist
framework of evolution. Mit Press; 2006.
18. Anderson JA. Cognitive and psychological computation with neural models. Systems, Man and
Cybernetics, IEEE Transactions on. 1983;(5):799–815.