University of Groningen

Evolvability in the context of antibiotic resistance
van Eldijk, Timo J B

DOI:
10.33612/diss.925124601
IMPORTANT NOTE: You are advised to consult the publisher's version (publisher's PDF) if you wish to cite from
it. Please check the document version below.
Document Version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record

Publication date:
2024
Link to publication in University of Groningen/UMCG research database

      Citation for published version (APA):
      van Eldijk, T. J. B. (2024). Evolvability in the context of antibiotic resistance. [Thesis fully internal (DIV),
      University of Groningen]. University of Groningen. https://doi.org/10.33612/diss.925124601

Copyright
Other than for strictly personal use, it is not permitted to download or to forward/distribute the text or part of it without the consent of the
author(s) and/or copyright holder(s), unless the work is under an open content license (like Creative Commons).
The publication may also be distributed here under the terms of Article 25fa of the Dutch Copyright Act, indicated by the "Taverne" license.
More information can be found on the University of Groningen website: https://www.rug.nl/library/open-access/self-archiving-pure/taverne-
amendment.
Take-down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately
and investigate your claim.
Downloaded from the University of Groningen/UMCG research database (Pure): http://www.rug.nl/research/portal. For technical reasons the
number of authors shown on this cover page is limited to 10 maximum.

Download date: 03-09-2026
    Evolvability in the context
      ofantibioticresistance

lvability in the context
fantbioticresistance

                               TimoJ.B.vanEldijk
Evolvability in the context
  of antibiotic resistance

                     Timo J.B. van Eldijk
The research presented in this thesis was carried out at the University of Groningen in the
research group Modelling Adaptive Response Mechanisms (MARM) at the Groningen Institute
of Evolutionary Life Sciences (GELIFES) and in the Molecular Genetics (MolGen) group at the
Groningen Biomolecular Sciences and Biotechnology Institute (GBB).

This PhD project was funded by a grant from the European Research Council awarded to F.J.
Weissing (ERC Advanced Grant No 789240). Part of this PhD project also received additional
funding from a Gratama foundation grant awarded to Timo J.B. van Eldijk (projectnr. 2022-
11).

Cover image: A strain of the bacterium Lactococcus lactis that has evolved high-level
resistance to the antibiotic ciprofloxacin (from the end of the experiment shown in Chapter 6
of this thesis, plasmid-free population B). The image shows a magnification of approximately
1000X. The bacteria were cultured in medium containing 160 g/ml ciprofloxacin and
subsequently photographed using a 100x oil immersion objective, an Amscope 2x camera
adapter and a Cannon 77D camera.

Cover picture and design: Timo J.B. van Eldijk

Printed by: Ipskamp printing, Enschede

ISBN: 978-94-6473-418-8

Copyright ©2024, Timo J.B. van Eldijk

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording
or otherwise, without prior permission of the author or the copyright-owning journals for
previously published chapters.
Evolvability in the context of antibiotic resistance

                                      PhD thesis

                       To obtain the degree of PhD at the
                              University of Groningen
                              on the authority of the

                    Rector Magnificus Prof. J.M.A. Scherpen
                              and in accordance with

                      the decision by the College of Deans.
                    This thesis will be defended in public on
                    Tuesday 12 March 2024 at 16:15 hours

                                           by

                         Timo Jakob Benjamin van Eldijk
                                born on 24 July 1995

                           in Utrecht, The Netherlands
Supervisors
 Prof. F.J. Weissing
 Prof. O.P. Kuipers
 Prof. G.S. van Doorn

Assessment Committee
 Prof. J. Falcao Salles
 Prof. J.A.G.M. De Visser
 Prof. H. Schulenburg
Table of contents

Chapter 1 Introduction                                   7

Chapter 2 Capturing the facets of evolvability in a mechanistic 25
                 framework

Chapter 3 Temperature dependence of the mutation rate    51

towards antibiotic resistance

Chapter 4 The evolution of condition-dependent mutation  89

rates in changing environments

Interlude 1 The evolutionary persistence of a plastic    123

phenotypic switch in the absence of selection

Chapter 5 The evolution of mutational transformers speeds 137
                 up adaptation in a changing environment

Chapter 6 The impact of plasmids on the de-novo evolution of 171
                 ciprofloxacin resistance in Lactococcus lactis

Chapter 7 Uniting community ecology and evolutionary     211

rescue: Community-Wide Rescue

Chapter 8 Discussion                                     247

Summary (En)                                             267

Samenvatting (NL)                                        271

Acknowledgements                                         276

About the author                                         280

Publication list                                         281

Author affiliations                                      282

                                                                    5
6
     Chapter 1

_______________________________________

     Introduction

           Timo J.B. van Eldijk

                                                                                           7
The emergence and spread of antibiotic resistance represent a major
challenge to public health. Every year an estimated 700,000 people are killed
globally by antibiotic-resistant infections, and, according to some estimates,
this number will rise to 10 million by the year 2050 (Willyard, 2017).
Inadequate prescribing practices, the agricultural use of antibiotics, and the
improper disposal of wastewater containing antibiotics have all contributed
to an alarming rise in antibiotic resistance (Martens & Demain, 2017;
Nadimpali et al., 2017). In addition, the problem of antibiotic resistance is
exacerbated by a low discovery rate of new antibiotics (Luepke et al., 2017).

The rise of antibiotic resistance is an example of `evolution in action':
bacterial populations adapt to a toxic environment by evolving resistance.
However, luckily, bacterial populations are not always able to adapt to
survive antibiotic exposure. What determines if a bacterial population can
adapt and develop resistance? To answer this question, we need to
understand what mechanisms enable bacterial populations to undergo
adaptive evolution, along with the factors that constrain their adaptive
potential. In other words, we need to understand `evolvability' in the context
of antibiotic resistance. Therefore, this PhD thesis will focus on
understanding evolvability, using the evolution of antibiotic resistance as a
model system. I will combine experimental evolution and simulation models
to gain fundamental insights into the mechanisms and organismal features
that determine evolvability. Meanwhile, these insights might also help to
solve a major societal challenge.

Defining evolvability

The exact definition of evolvability has been much debated in the literature
(Wagner, 2007; Pigliucci, 2008). Numerous definitions have been provided,
yet these definitions can roughly be split into two categories, those based on
the work of Houle (1992) and those based on Wagner & Altenberg (1996).
Evolvability as defined by Houle concerns the standing genetic variation and
covariation within a population (Houle, 1992; Pigliucci, 2008). In evolutionary
quantitative genetics this standing genetic variation, quantified using
narrow-sense heritability, determines the response of a population to
selection (Houle, 1992; Pigliucci, 2008). In the short term, the response to

8
selection may indeed be predominantly determined by the standing genetic
variation. However, when considering evolution on longer timescales the
influx of new mutations cannot be neglected, as the evolutionary trajectory
of a population is ultimately determined by the mutations that occur
(Tenallion et al., 2012; Lässig et al., 2017). In short, evolvability sensu Houle
is a concept more focused on short-timescales, which overlaps with the
already existing concept of heritability. Therefore, under this definition
evolvability does not provide an interesting extension of evolutionary theory.
Wagner & Altenberg (1996) made an important conceptual advance by
stating that the capacity of a biological system to undergo adaptations
dependent on both the variation present within that system but also the
variability of that system, that is, the capacity of the system to produce new
variation (Pigliucci, 2008). When describing evolvability including variability,
evolvability is a rich concept that goes beyond the standard treatments of
classical evolutionary theory.

Throughout this thesis, I will be defining evolvability as the capability of a
biological system to undergo adaptive evolution. For a detailed motivation
for using this definition the reader is referred to Chapter 2 of this thesis.
Whilst this definition is derived from that of Wagner & Altenberg (1996), it is
different in two crucial ways. Importantly this definition encompasses both
(standing) variation and variability, and also many other mechanisms and
organismal features that impact adaptive evolution. The definition I use also
deliberately focuses on adaptive evolution. This focus is motivated by the
potential applications of evolvability research; I am ultimately interested in
understanding and predicting adaptive processes, such as the evolution of
antibiotic resistance.

Evolutionary rescue theory

A particularly useful theoretical modelling framework to describe evolvability
in the context of antibiotic resistance is evolutionary rescue theory.
Evolutionary rescue models describe a population facing a drastically altered
environment, for example a bacterial population facing antibiotics (Ramsayer
et al., 2013; Alexander et al., 2014; Bell, 2017). When antibiotics are
introduced, the individuals in the population die faster than they can

                                                                                                                9
reproduce, leading to a steady decrease in population size. If nothing
happens, this decrease will continue until the population is extinct. If a
resistant mutant arises that can grow in the presence of antibiotics, this
mutant can rescue the population, allowing the population to recover. Here
two scenarios are usually considered: Resistant rescue mutants can either be
already present in the population (standing genetic variation) or they can
arise during the rescue process because of de-novo mutation. These two
scenarios echo the two commonly considered aspects of evolvability:
variation and variability.

In Chapter 7 of this thesis, I will use simulations to expand evolutionary
rescue theory to a multispecies context, simulating how species abundances
change when a whole bacterial community undergoes evolutionary rescue
as a consequence of antibiotic exposure. Evolutionary rescue theory also
formed an important inspiration for Chapters 3 and 4 of this thesis. In
evolutionary rescue theory one of the key parameters that determines the
probability of evolutionary rescue is the mutation rate, the higher the
mutation rate the higher the probability of rescue. This emphasizes the role
of mutation rates as a key mechanism underlying evolvability.

The mechanisms underlying evolvability

In Chapter 2 of this thesis, I systematically explore the mechanisms and
features that underlie evolvability. In short, these determinants can be
divided into three categories, based on how they impact evolvability. The
first category of determinants are features or processes that generate and/or
maintain variation, for example the mutation rate (Tenallion et al., 2016;
Sprouffske et al., 2018). The second category consists of those determinants
that shape the effect of variation on fitness. An example is the structure of
the gene-regulatory network. The structure of this gene-regulatory network
can shape the way mutations can impact the phenotype, thereby impacting
the potential for adaptation (Crombach & Hogeweg, 2008). The third
category of determinants are those that shape the process of selection. An
example is the generation time: a shorter generation time speeds up
adaptive evolution (Tomas et al., 2010; Gandon & Michalakis, 2002). It is
worth noting that determinants of evolvability can fit into more than one

10
category, since some features affect evolvability in more than one way. An
example of this is horizontal gene transfer: it allows variation to be
recombined in new ways (generating and maintaining variation), but it also
allows beneficial variants to spread more quickly (shaping the process of
selection) (Koonin, 2016; Croll & McDonald, 2012). In this thesis, I will focus
on three determinants of evolvability: mutation rates, the gene regulatory
network structure, and horizontal gene transfer.

The mutation rate

One of the clearest mechanisms underlying evolvability is the mutation rate.
Mutation rates are known to vary widely, both between different species and
between individuals of the same species (Conrad et al., 2011; Sung et al.,
2016). There is also overwhelming evidence that mutation rates are subject
to selection (Sniegowski et al., 1997; Tenallion et al., 2001; Tenallion et al.,
2016). Normally, when a population is well adapted, there is selection for a
low mutation rate, because most mutations will have a detrimental effect on
fitness. The situation is different for populations that are initially poorly
adapted, such as in microbial evolution experiments in which "mutator"
strains arise. These mutator strains have an elevated mutation rate, for
example due to DNA mismatch repair defects (Sniegowski et al., 1997;
Tenallion et al., 2016). In these experiments, the population is undergoing
rapid adaptation to a new environment, associated with the spread of
mutator strains. These mutator strains produce more mutations, many of
which are maladaptive. However, when adapting to a new environment the
fitness cost of these maladaptive mutations is more than compensated by
the faster occurrence of beneficial mutations (Sniegowski et al., 1997;
Tenallion et al., 2001; Tenallion et al., 2016). Mutator alleles are indirectly
selected through the beneficial mutations they produce. In other words,
when a population is poorly adapted the increased influx of beneficial
mutations offered by an elevated mutation can to some extent outweigh the
detrimental effects of an elevated mutation rate (Sniegowski et al., 1997;
Tenallion et al., 2001; Tenallion et al., 2016; Sprouffske et al., 2018). The
interplay between the beneficial and detrimental effects selects for an
optimal mutation rate.

                                                                                                               11
Considering that a higher mutation rate can be selectively advantageous
under certain environmental conditions, it does not seem surprising that in
some cases the mutation rate can be regulated depending on the
environmental state: in some bacteria the mutation rate is elevated in
stressful conditions through a process known as stress-induced mutagenesis
(Bjedov et al., 2003; Foster, 2007). In Chapter 3 I will experimentally explore
how an environmental parameter, in this case temperature can shape the
mutation rate toward antibiotic resistance. I aim to see if the manipulation
of temperature, can be used as an intervention to lower the mutation rate
and can thus be used to combat the evolution of antibiotic resistance (i.e.
lower the probability of evolutionary rescue). In Chapter 4 I will use
individual-based simulation models to see under what circumstances one
might expect condition-dependent mutation rates to evolve.

Gene regulatory network structure

Traditional evolutionary models often fail to consider the complex
relationship between the genotype and the phenotype. A wide range of
underlying mechanisms, including complex network of developmental
pathways and gene interactions are involved in translating the genotype to
the phenotype. Explicitly considering this gene regulatory network brings to
light another interesting mechanism underlying evolvability. The structure of
the gene regulatory/developmental network can bias the effect of genotypic
mutations on the phenotype. So, whilst genetic mutations occur at random,
their effect on the phenotype is biased through the structure of the gene-
regulatory network (Wagner & Zhang, 2011; Hogeweg, 2012). In the
literature, this effect is sometimes referred to as developmental bias. A well-
known example of developmental bias are the two eyespots on the wings of
the butterfly Bicyclus anynana. Mutations can easily change the colour
composition of both eyespots together, but they cannot easily change the
colour composition of the two eyespots independently (Allen et al., 2008).
Depending on the direction of selection such a developmental bias could
inhibit or facilitate adaptive evolution.

A more extreme case of the gene regulatory network structure shaping
evolvability is what I have termed a `mutational transformer'. This

12
phenomenon was first described by Crombach & Hogeweg (2008) and
further investigated by Cuypers et al. (2017). They considered an
environment that alternates between two alternative states and each state
of these two states requires a different optimal phenotype. They also
explicitly modelled the underlying gene-regulatory network. The population
adaptively tracks the environment, this is where the population undergoes
evolutionary adaptation each time the environment shifts to the alternative
state (Botero et al., 2015; Cuypers et al., 2017). During the first few
fluctuations, many different mutations are required to shift to the new
optimal phenotype when the environment switches. However, after the
population has experienced many such fluctuations, mutations altering the
gene regulatory network structure occur that shorten the mutational paths
between the two optimal phenotypes, creating a mutational transformer.
Thus, when the environment shifts to the alternative state, these shortened
mutational paths allows for more rapid adaptation. In a mutational
transformer the gene regulatory network is structured in such a way that a
single or very few mutations allow the switch to an alternative adaptive
phenotype, facilitating rapid adaptation. However, how mutational
transformers evolve and function is not well understood. In Chapter 5 of this
thesis, I examine the evolution of mutational transformers in a simple gene
regulatory network model, elucidating their evolution and inner workings.

Horizontal gene transfer

In bacteria, horizontal gene transfer can occur through various mechanisms.
In this thesis, I focus on conjugation, since many clinically relevant antibiotic
resistance genes are horizontally transferred using conjugation (Robicsek et
al., 2006; Litrup et al., 2017; Yui et al., 2019; Venketesan et al., 2023). In
conjugation, extrachromosomal pieces of DNA called `plasmids' are
exchanged between bacterial cells through cell-to-cell contact (Lopatkin et
al., 2017). Here it is important to note that genes on plasmids can also be
transferred to the chromosome and vice versa through recombination (Heap
et al., 2012). Carrying plasmids often comes at a cost to the host cell, which
needs to maintain, replicate, and express an extra piece of DNA.
Furthermore, since plasmids are pieces of DNA that replicate separately from

                                                                                                               13
the bacterial chromosome, they can act as independent `selfish' evolutionary
entities (San Millan & MacLean; 2017; Ghally & Gillings; 2021). For example,
some plasmids are maintained due to very high rates of horizontal
transmission, essentially persisting as an infection, to the detriment of the
host cells (Brockhurst & Harrison, 2022).

However, there is also another side to plasmids, several hypotheses can be
found scattered throughout the literature on how plasmid-based horizontal
gene transfer might enhance the evolvability of the host cell. First of all,
horizontal gene transfer creates new combinations of genes, generating
novelty by recombining existing variation (Hall & Kerney, 2012; Kingston et
al., 2015). Second, horizontal gene transfer can bring together genes from
independent clonal lineages, alleviating `clonal interference' (Cooper, 2007).
In `clonal interference', beneficial genes from different clonal lineages
compete, this competition of beneficial can hinder adaptation. Third, if
beneficial genes are spread horizontally as well as vertically this can increase
the rate of spread of beneficial genes, thereby enhancing the rate of
adaptation (Chu et al., 2018). Fourth, horizontal gene transfer creates a
reservoir of genetic variants that can be easily accessed. This kind of reservoir
dynamic, facilitates the maintenance of genetic variation, thereby enhancing
evolvability (Croll & McDonald, 2012; Woods et al., 2020; van Dijk, 2020).
However, the link between horizontal gene transfer through plasmids and
evolvability is poorly understood at best (Koonin, 2016). In Chapter 6, I will
use experimental evolution to study the impact of plasmids on the de-novo
evolution of antibiotic resistance.

The evolution of evolvability

If we consider the mechanisms and features underlying evolvability, it is
evident that these differ widely across the tree of life and are subject to
evolution (Conrad et al., 2011; Sung et al., 2016; Martinez-Padilla et al.,
2017). However, an important question remains: Have these mechanisms
been shaped by selection because of their effects on evolvability? In other
words, is evolvability a selected (evolved) property of a biological system or
are differences in evolvability simply a side effect of other selective pressures
or genetic drift (Tenallion et al., 2001; Woods et al., 2011; Nelson & Masel,

14
2018)? For mutation rates, there is a good body of empirical and modelling
evidence that they are indeed subject to selection for evolvability
(Sniegowski et al., 1997; Tenallion et al., 2001; Tenallion et al., 2016),
although these mechanisms are subtle because they tend to rely on indirect
selection. For most other determinants of evolvability, such evidence is
currently lacking. In Chapters 4 and 5 I will use simulation models to explore
the evolution of evolvability in response to fluctuating environments.

This thesis

This thesis aims to understand evolvability in the context of antibiotic
resistance. As a starting point, I have developed a mechanistic framework
that categorizes the determinants of evolvability and provides several
concrete recommendations on how to study evolvability (Chapter 2). By
focusing on the underlying mechanisms of evolvability, I break down the
problem of understanding evolvability into manageable chunks. Each of my
chapters will focus on a particular determinant of evolvability: mutation
rates, the genotype-to-phenotype map, and horizontal gene transfer.
Throughout I use two complementary approaches: microbial experiments
(Chapters 3 and 6) and simulation models (Chapters 4, 5 and 7). Theory and
experiment interact in a synergistic way. Microbial experiments provide new
observations that aid the development of theoretical models. On the other
hand, the hypotheses and ideas derived from theoretical models can
improve the design of experiments. This combination of the practical and
theoretical is echoed throughout this thesis: I hope to show that fundamental
theoretical insights into evolvability can help address the very practical
problem of antibiotic resistance evolution.

In Chapter 2, I first discuss how to define evolvability. Subsequently, I explore
the mechanisms and organismal features underlying evolvability and develop
a coherent mechanistic framework for categorizing these determinants of
evolvability. I argue that a mechanistic view coupled with a clear definition,
brings the concept of evolvability into sharper focus. This leads to several
concrete recommendations on how to study evolvability. For example, I
recommend that researchers should explicitly account for the timescale on
which determinants act. Furthermore, I urge researchers to consider what I

                                                                                                               15
have termed "the scope" of a determinant. Some determinants, such as
mutation rates, affect evolvability in a wide range of environments. Other
determinants, such as the re-structuring of the genotype-to-phenotype map,
may only affect evolvability in a more restricted set of environments.

In Chapter 3, I examine an empirical example of a condition-dependent
mutation rate in the bacterium Escherichia coli. I experimentally assess the
impact of elevated temperatures on the mutation rate towards antibiotic
resistance for three different antibiotics. Such elevated temperatures are
often encountered by bacterial populations since fever (an elevation of body
temperature) is a common response to infection. I show that even a relatively
small change in temperature can alter the mutation rate by an order of
magnitude. However, the nature of the change and the underlying
mechanism differ depending on the antibiotic. These results might pave the
way for a new way to mitigate the emergence of antibiotic resistance: the
choice of an antibiotic and the decision of whether to suppress fever could
be coordinated to minimize the mutation rate towards antibiotic resistance.

In Chapter 4, I use an individual-based simulation model to study the
evolution of condition-dependent mutation rates in a changing environment.
I consider a model where the mutation rate can potentially be
changed/regulated according to the mismatch between an individual's
phenotype and its environment. I show that both condition-dependent and
constant mutation-rate strategies can evolve. Which strategy emerges is
strongly dependent on the rate of environmental change. I also show that
condition-dependent mutation rates enhance evolvability: they allow
populations to better track a changing environment.

In Interlude 1, I worked in a team collaborating with researchers studying
fatty-acid synthesis in a parasitic wasp. These researchers had found that a
particular metabolic pathway was only expressed when it was induced by the
environment, a phenomenon known as phenotypic plasticity. They also
found that this inducible metabolic pathway was stably maintained over long
evolutionary timescales, whilst it was only very rarely expressed. This was
surprising since one would expect such an adaptation to be degraded by
mutations and subsequently lost, since selection against degrading

16
mutations only occurs very rarely. To help explain this I explore an individual-
based simulation model of how such a phenotypically plastic trait evolves
and is maintained over long timescales. I show that the structure of the gene
regulatory network can evolve to become robust to mutation. This explains
how a phenotypically plastic adaptation can be maintained over long
timescales even when it is rarely expressed.

In Chapter 5, I consider a model where the phenotype of an individual is
determined by a simple gene regulatory network. A population of these
individuals must adapt to an environment that switches/changes between
two alternative states (for example the presence or absence of an antibiotic).
I show that even in this very simple model, the structure of the gene-
regulatory network can evolve to bias the phenotypic effects of mutations
towards adaptive outcomes, thus facilitating evolvability. I examine in detail
the mechanisms underlying such mutational transformers and show that two
distinct mechanisms emerge depending on the nature of gene interactions.

In Chapter 6, I use a 31-day evolution experiment (approximately 237
generations) to examine the impact of plasmids on the de-novo evolution of
antibiotic resistance. I exposed plasmid-bearing and plasmid-free
populations of the bacterium Lactococcus lactis to an increasing
concentration of the antibiotic ciprofloxacin. Over the course of the
experiment, the populations managed to evolve a high level of ciprofloxacin
resistance. Meanwhile, I also evolved plasmid-bearing and plasmid-free
control populations in the absence of the antibiotic. I found that, in the
context of this experiment, plasmids did not have a noticeable impact on
evolvability. This may be explained by the relatively limited timescale of the
experiment. I find indications that there is selection against the plasmid, but
only in the presence of the antibiotic ciprofloxacin. I also used whole-genome
sequencing to examine the mutations underlying ciprofloxacin resistance.

In Chapter 7, I use a simulation model to expand evolutionary rescue theory
to a community context. I model a whole ecological community undergoing
evolutionary rescue in response to a drastically deteriorated environment,
for example, a gut microbial community facing antibiotic treatment. I study
how species abundances change during the evolutionary rescue process. I

                                                                                                               17
show that community-wide evolutionary rescue leads to a very rapid loss of
rare species from the community.
Bringing everything together in Chapter 8, I briefly summarise the insights
gained into evolvability and its evolution and how some of these might
eventually be harnessed to combat the evolution of antibiotic resistance. I
also outline the way forward for evolvability research. I argue that a
mechanistic approach is essential, using the synergy between theory and
experiment to formulate a coherent theory of evolvability.

18
References

Alexander, H. K., Martin, G., Martin, O. Y., & Bonhoeffer, S. (2014).
Evolutionary rescue: linking theory for conservation and
medicine. Evolutionary applications, 7(10), 1161-1179.

Allen, C. E., Beldade, P., Zwaan, B. J., & Brakefield, P. M. (2008). Differences
in the selection response of serially repeated color pattern characters:
standing variation, development, and evolution. BMC Evolutionary
Biology, 8, 1-13.

Bell, G. (2017). Evolutionary rescue. Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution,
and Systematics, 48, 605-627.

Bjedov, I., Tenaillon, O., Gerard, B., Souza, V., Denamur, E., Radman, M., et
al. (2003). Stress-induced mutagenesis in bacteria. Science, 300(5624),
1404-1409.

Brockhurst, M. A., & Harrison, E. (2022). Ecological and evolutionary
solutions to the plasmid paradox. Trends in Microbiology, 30(6), 534-543

Chu, H. Y., Sprouffske, K., & Wagner, A. (2018). Assessing the benefits of
horizontal gene transfer by laboratory evolution and genome
sequencing. BMC evolutionary biology, 18, 1-21.

Consuegra, J., Gaffé, J., Lenski, R. E., Hindré, T., Barrick, J. E., Tenaillon, O., &
Schneider, D. (2021). Insertion-sequence-mediated mutations both
promote and constrain evolvability during a long-term experiment with
bacteria. Nature communications, 12(1), 980.

Conrad, D. F., Keebler, J. E., DePristo, M. A., Lindsay, S. J., Zhang, Y., Casals,
F. et al. (2011). Variation in genomewide mutation rates within and
between human families. Nature Genetics, 43(7), 712.

Cooper, T. F. (2007). Recombination speeds adaptation by reducing
competition between beneficial mutations in populations of Escherichia
coli. PLoS biology, 5(9), e225.

                                                                                                               19
Cuypers, T. D., Rutten, J. P., & Hogeweg, P. (2017). Evolution of evolvability
and phenotypic plasticity in virtual cells. BMC Evolutionary Biology, 17(1),
60.

Croll, D., & McDonald, B. A. (2012). The accessory genome as a cradle for
adaptive evolution in pathogens. PLoS Pathogens, 8(4), e1002608.

Crombach, A., & Hogeweg, P. (2008). Evolution of evolvability in gene
regulatory networks. PLoS Computational Biology, 4(7), e1000112.f

Foster, P. L. (2007). Stress-induced mutagenesis in bacteria. Critical reviews
in biochemistry and molecular biology, 42(5), 373-397.

Gandon, S., & Michalakis, Y. (2002). Local adaptation, evolutionary
potential and host­parasite coevolution: interactions between migration,
mutation, population size and generation time. Journal of Evolutionary
Biology, 15(3), 451-462.

Ghaly, T. M., & Gillings, M. R. (2022). New perspectives on mobile genetic
elements: a paradigm shift for managing the antibiotic resistance
crisis. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 377(1842),
20200462.

Hall, B. K., & Kerney, R. (2012). Levels of biological organization and the
origin of novelty. Journal of Experimental Zoology Part B: Molecular and
Developmental Evolution, 318(6), 428-437.

Heap, J. T., Ehsaan, M., Cooksley, C. M., Ng, Y. K., Cartman, S. T., Winzer, K.,
& Minton, N. P. (2012). Integration of DNA into bacterial chromosomes
from plasmids without a counter-selection marker. Nucleic acids
research, 40(8), e59-e59.

Hogeweg, P. (2012). Toward a theory of multilevel evolution: long-term
information integration shapes the mutational landscape and enhances
evolvability, p. 195-224. In Soyer, O. S. Evolutionary Systems Biology.
Springer, New York.

Houle, D. (1992). Comparing evolvability and variability of quantitative
traits. Genetics, 130(1), 195-204.

20
Kingston, A. W., Roussel-Rossin, C., Dupont, C., & Raleigh, E. A. (2015).
Novel recA-independent horizontal gene transfer in Escherichia coli K-
12. PloS one, 10(7), e0130813.

Koonin, E. V. (2016). Horizontal gene transfer: essentiality and evolvability
in prokaryotes, and roles in evolutionary transitions. F1000Research, 5

Lässig, M., Mustonen, V., & Walczak, A. M. (2017). Predicting evolution.
Nature Ecology & Evolution, 1(3), 0077.

Litrup, E., Kiil, K., Hammerum, A. M., Roer, L., Nielsen, E. M., & Torpdahl, M.
(2017). Plasmid-borne colistin resistance gene mcr-3 in Salmonella isolates
from human infections, Denmark, 2009­17. Eurosurveillance, 22(31),
30587.

Lopatkin, A. J., Meredith, H. R., Srimani, J. K., Pfeiffer, C., Durrett, R., & You,
L. (2017). Persistence and reversal of plasmid-mediated antibiotic
resistance. Nature communications, 8(1), 1689.

Luepke, K. H., Suda, K. J., Boucher, H., Russo, R. L., Bonney, M. W., Hunt, T.
D., & Mohr III, J. F. (2017). Past, present, and future of antibacterial
economics: increasing bacterial resistance, limited antibiotic pipeline, and
societal implications. Pharmacotherapy: The Journal of Human
Pharmacology and Drug Therapy, 37(1), 71-84.

Martens, E., & Demain, A. L. (2017). The antibiotic resistance crisis, with a
focus on the United States. The Journal of antibiotics, 70(5), 520.

Martínez-Padilla, J., Estrada, A., Early, R., & Garcia-Gonzalez, F. (2017).
Evolvability meets biogeography: evolutionary potential decreases at high
and low environmental favourability. Proceedings of the Royal Society B:
Biological Sciences, 284(1856), 20170516.

Nadimpalli, M., Delarocque-Astagneau, E., Love, D. C., Price, L. B., Huynh, B.
T., Collard, J. M., et al. (2018). Combating global antibiotic resistance:
emerging one health concerns in lower-and middle-income countries.
Clinical Infectious Diseases, 66(6), 963-969.

                                                                                                               21
Nelson, P., & Masel, J. (2018). Evolutionary capacitance emerges
spontaneously during adaptation to environmental changes. Cell Reports,
25(1), 249-258.

Pigliucci, M. (2008). Is evolvability evolvable? Nature Reviews Genetics, 9(1),
75.

Ramsayer, J., Kaltz, O., & Hochberg, M. E. (2013). Evolutionary rescue in
populations of Pseudomonas fluorescens across an antibiotic
gradient. Evolutionary applications, 6(4), 608-616.

Robicsek, A., Jacoby, G. A., & Hooper, D. C. (2006). The worldwide
emergence of plasmid-mediated quinolone resistance. The Lancet infectious
diseases, 6(10), 629-640.

San Millan, A., & MacLean, R. C. (2017). Fitness costs of plasmids: a limit to
plasmid transmission. Microbiology spectrum, 5(5), 10-1128.

Sniegowski, P. D., Gerrish, P. J., & Lenski, R. E. (1997). Evolution of high
mutation rates in experimental populations of E. coli. Nature, 387(6634),
703.

Sprouffske, K., Aguílar-Rodríguez, J., Sniegowski, P., & Wagner, A. (2018).
High mutation rates limit evolutionary adaptation in Escherichia coli. PLoS
Genetics, 14(4), e1007324

Tenaillon, O., Taddei, F., Radman, M., & Matic, I. (2001). Second-order
selection in bacterial evolution: selection acting on mutation and
recombination rates in the course of adaptation. Research in Microbiology,
152(1), 11-16.

Tenaillon, O., Rodríguez-Verdugo, A., Gaut, R. L., McDonald, P., Bennett, A.
F., Long, A. D., & Gaut, B. S. (2012). The molecular diversity of adaptive
convergence. Science, 335(6067), 457-461.

Tenaillon, O., Barrick, J. E., Ribeck, N., Deatherage, D. E., Blanchard, J. L.,
Dasgupta, A., et al. (2016). Tempo and mode of genome evolution in a
50,000-generation experiment. Nature, 536(7615), 165.

22
Thomas, J. A., Welch, J. J., Lanfear, R., & Bromham, L. (2010). A generation
time effect on the rate of molecular evolution in invertebrates. Molecular
biology and evolution, 27(5), 1173-1180.

Van Dijk, B. (2020). Can mobile genetic elements rescue genes from
extinction?. Current genetics, 66(6), 1069-1071.

Venkatesan, M., Fruci, M., Verellen, L. A., Skarina, T., Mesa, N., Flick, R., ... &
Savchenko, A. (2023). Molecular mechanism of plasmid-borne resistance to
sulfonamide antibiotics. Nature Communications, 14(1), 4031.

Wagner, G. P., & Altenberg, L. (1996). Perspective: complex adaptations and
the evolution of evolvability. Evolution, 50(3), 967-976.

Wagner, A. (2007). Robustness and evolvability: a paradox resolved.
Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 275(1630), 91-100.

Wagner, G. P., & Zhang, J. (2011). The pleiotropic structure of the
genotype­phenotype map: the evolvability of complex organisms. Nature
Reviews Genetics, 12(3), 204.

Willyard, C. (2017). The drug-resistant bacteria that pose the greatest
health threats. Nature News, 543(7643), 15.

Woods, R. J., Barrick, J. E., Cooper, T. F., Shrestha, U., Kauth, M. R., & Lenski,
R. E. (2011). Second-order selection for evolvability in a large Escherichia
coli population. Science, 331(6023), 1433-1436.

Woods, L. C., Gorrell, R. J., Taylor, F., Connallon, T., Kwok, T., & McDonald,
M. J. (2020). Horizontal gene transfer potentiates adaptation by reducing
selective constraints on the spread of genetic variation. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 117(43), 26868-26875.

Yui Eto, K., Firth, N., Davis, A. M., Kwong, S. M., Krysiak, M., Lee, Y. T., ... &
Ramsay, J. P. (2019). Evolution of a 72-kilobase cointegrant, conjugative
multiresistance plasmid in community-associated methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus isolates from the early 1990s. Antimicrobial agents
and chemotherapy, 63(11), 10-1128.

                                                                                                               23
24
            Chapter 2

                 _______________________________________

Capturing the facets of evolvability
    in a mechanistic framework

   Jana M. Riederer*, Stefano Tiso*, Timo J.B. van Eldijk*,
                          Franz J. Weissing

  *These authors contributed equally to the manuscript (shared first authorship)
           Published (2022) in Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 37(5), 430-439.

                                                                                                              25
Abstract

"Evolvability" ­ the capability to undergo adaptive evolution ­ is a key
concept for understanding and predicting the response of biological
systems to environmental change. Evolvability has various facets and is
applied in many ways, easily leading to misunderstandings among
researchers. To clarify matters, we first categorize the mechanisms and
organismal features underlying evolvability into determinants providing
variation, determinants shaping the effect of variation on fitness, and
determinants shaping the selection process. Second, we stress the
importance of timescale when studying evolvability. Third, we distinguish
between evolvability determinants with a broad and a narrow scope.
Finally, we highlight two contrasting perspectives on evolvability: general
evolvability and specific evolvability. We hope that this framework
facilitates communication and guides future research.

Evolvability is an important yet elusive concept

Understanding adaptation to changing environments is more important than
ever. Climate change, antibiotic resistance, and viral vaccine evasion
represent major societal challenges: is an endangered species able to adapt
to environmental change? Will a bacterial pathogen evolve antibiotic
resistance? Can a virus evade vaccine-based immunization? At the core of
these issues lies a common element: the capability of organisms to adapt ­
evolvability [1]. Evolvability research sheds new light on genomic
architecture [2], the structure of regulatory networks [3,4], and many other
features of biological systems (see Glossary). It has yielded surprising new
insights, such as: adaptive evolution can proceed at a similar pace as
ecological change, resulting in intricate and unexpected eco-evolutionary
dynamics [5,6], evolvability and robustness do not conflict but mutually
reinforce each other [3,7,8]; and organisms with high evolvability can
"generalize" over environments [9,10]. Furthermore, evolvability research
may add new perspectives to formulating a predictive theory of evolution
(see Box 1 and Outstanding Questions).

26
Evolvability is studied by diverse approaches. For instance, Johansson et al.
[11] inspect the genetic variance-covariance matrix; Woods et al. [12]
compare the speed of adaptation of bacterial strains; and Martín-Serra et. al
[13] focus on morphological integration and modularity. These approaches,
though all valid, are widely disparate: all aim to understand evolvability, yet
each focuses on a different facet. This plurality is also reflected in the fact
that evolvability has been defined in many different ways (see Box 1). We
aim to highlight the different facets of evolvability and how they relate to
each other, to facilitate a more nuanced and cohesive discourse on the topic.
Throughout, we define evolvability as the capability of a biological system to
undergo adaptive evolution (see Box 1 for a justification).

Toward a mechanistic approach to evolvability

Evolvability is often viewed in terms of outcomes (e.g. speed of adaptation).
As the same outcome can be achieved in many ways, it is useful to study
evolvability by a mechanistic approach [14]: viewing evolvability not as a
phenomenon per se but as a product of the mechanisms and organismal
features that underlie it. A mechanistic perspective also clarifies discussions
on the evolution of evolvability [1,14]: while questions regarding the
evolution of "the capability to undergo adaptive evolution" easily turn
abstract, they become more obvious and transparent when translated into
questions regarding the evolution of concrete mechanisms (e.g. the
mutation rate).

Categorizing the determinants of evolvability

We refer to the mechanisms and organismal features that govern evolvability
as determinants of evolvability. These affect different aspects of adaptive
evolution, and consequently shape evolvability in different ways. We here
identify three ways in which determinants can shape evolvability, based on
what aspect of adaptive evolution they affect, and categorize them
accordingly (figure 1). Firstly, determinants may affect evolvability by
providing variation. The mutation rate is the most obvious example of such
a determinant [2,15­17]. Secondly, determinants may affect evolvability by

                                                                                                               27
influencing the effect of variation on fitness. For example, developmental
biases may predispose mutations towards being beneficial [18­21]. Thirdly,
determinants may affect evolvability by shaping the selection process ­
shorter generation times, for example, may speed up adaptation [22,23].

Figure 1: The way that mechanisms and organismal features affect evolvability can be
classified into three categories. Each one contributes to evolvability in a different way. This
can be compared to the process of baking a cake: the end result depends on several
fundamentally different aspects - the amount of ingredients, the quality of ingredients and
the baking process. We suggest that evolvability is analogously affected by three different
classes of determinants: those providing variation ("the amount of sugar"), those shaping the
effect of variation on fitness ("the type of sugar"), and those shaping the selection process
("the baking process"). An example of a determinant providing variation is the mutation rate,
where mutation encapsulates a wide variety of phenomena ranging from point mutations to
genome rearrangements. Developmental biases are examples for determinants that shape
the effect of variation on fitness. Consider for instance the developmental system underlying
the eyespot pattern on the wings of the butterfly Bicyclus anynana. This system is organized
in such a manner that mutations can easily change the colour composition of the two wing
eyespots in the same direction, whilst mutations changing the colour composition in opposite
directions are extremely rare (depiction based on [40]). Depending on whether the selective
pressure favours eyespots with the same colour composition or not, this bias may facilitate or
impede evolvability. Finally, an example of a determinant that shapes the selection process is
generation time: a shorter generation time allows faster adaptation ­ in absolute time,
bacteria evolve faster than elephants.

28
Category 1: providing variation

Heritable variation serves as the raw material for evolution. Hence, our first
category refers to those mechanisms that generate and maintain variation.
For example, mutations generate variation in many ways, ranging from point
mutations to genome rearrangements. Interestingly, mutation rates vary
widely between organisms as well as within genomes [24­26], and they can
be regulated based on the environment (e.g. stress-induced mutagenesis,
[27]) ­ indicating that evolvability can evolve through the evolution of the
mutation rate. Examples of determinants maintaining variation include
evolutionary capacitors such as heat shock proteins. HSP-90 in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, for instance, acts as a chaperone protein aiding
correct protein folding. Chaperoning can shield sequence mutations from
selection, thus maintaining variation. This can later be released under
stressful conditions [28,29]. Developmental canalization can affect
evolvability in a similar manner, in that it allows the accumulation of cryptic
genetic variation [30]. Furthermore, capacitors may also be behavioural in
nature, as parental care and thermoregulatory behaviour also allow cryptic
genetic variation to accumulate [31,32]. Horizontal gene transfer may also
be viewed as a category 1 determinant, as it allows variants to be maintained
that would otherwise be lost from the population, for instance by
establishing an "accessory genome" [33,34] or through the so-called
rescuable gene hypothesis [35]. Not all heritable variation is genetic:
epigenetic inheritance, inheritance of environmental features, and cultural
inheritance can also affect adaptive evolution [36,37]. Hence, category 1 also
includes mechanisms providing non-genetic heritable variation.

Category 2: shaping the effect of variation on fitness

The mapping from mutation to fitness is affected by a variety of mechanisms:
mutations may be random with respect to the genotype, but their effects on
the phenotype and consequently fitness are often not [8]. Through features
such as genomic, developmental, and regulatory architecture, the genotype-
to-phenotype-to-fitness map can bias the fitness effects of mutations
[19,38]. Category 2 thus contains determinants that influence the effect of
variation on fitness. Examples can be found in the evo-devo literature

                                                                                                               29
[19,21,39,40], which describes various biases introduced through the
developmental process (developmental bias, for an example see the
butterfly Bicyclus anynana in Fig. 1). The effect of variation on fitness can also
be biased by genomic and regulatory architecture [4,41]. In yeast, for
example, genes for which upregulation is selectively favoured in a higher-
temperature environment are grouped on the same chromosome.
Therefore, a duplication of this chromosome suffices to achieve upregulation
of all relevant genes; without such genome organisation, many independent
mutations would be required to obtain an equivalent high-temperature
adaptation [42].

Category 3: shaping the selection process

Starting from the same variation, evolution can still proceed at a very
different pace and/or can lead to very different outcomes. Thus, category 3
contains determinants that impact evolvability not by shaping variation, but
rather by shaping how the selective process acts on this variation. Examples
are organismal features influencing population structure (e.g. dispersal
tendency or mating patterns), as population structure may strongly affect
adaptive evolution [43]. For instance, limited dispersal is hypothesized to
have aided the rapid evolution of eusociality in diverse clades of insects [44].
Two other examples of category 3 determinants are generation time and the
mode of reproduction. In coevolutionary host-pathogen arms races, the
shorter generation time of pathogens provides them with an evolvability
advantage, as they can evolve faster per time unit than their host [23].
Considering the Red Queen hypothesis, it becomes evident that hosts need
other adaptations (e.g. sexual reproduction or a variation-generating
immune system) to cope with pathogens on a longer-term perspective [45].
In the coevolution of hosts and their symbionts, the rapid evolution and/or
diversification of the symbiont is often not in the interest of their host.
Accordingly, the hosts of various symbiotic systems reduce the symbiont's
evolvability by actively interfering with the symbiont's sexual reproduction
[46].

30
How a mechanistic categorisation aids our understanding
of evolvability

Some determinants of evolvability can be classified into more than one
category. This is a deliberate feature of the proposed categorisation, as it
highlights that a determinant can affect evolvability in different ways. The
categorisation prompts the researcher to critically consider how mechanisms
and processes shape adaptive evolution. An illustrative example can be
found in the literature on evolvability and plasticity. Some have argued that
plasticity impedes evolvability: plastic responses shield organisms from
selection, preventing genetic adaptation (category 3) [47]. Others have
argued that plasticity allows the accumulation of cryptic genetic variation
(category 1) [10,48], thus potentially enhancing evolvability, because plastic
traits are only expressed under particular environmental conditions. Finally,
arguments derived from Gene Regulatory Network models conclude that
the evolution of plasticity can restructure the genotype-phenotype map in
such a way that random mutations are more likely to produce adaptive
phenotypes (category 2) [49,50]. Our categorisation of determinants thus
showcases these often subtle but nevertheless crucial distinctions.

The effect of modularity on evolvability provides another example.
Inspection of the underlying mechanisms reveals that modularity has not one
but two impacts on evolvability. Firstly, it facilitates innovation by allowing
pre-existing modules to be combined in different configurations, thus
providing variation (category 1) [51]. Secondly, it also allows individual
modules to vary independently, without affecting the functionality of the
entire system (reducing antagonistic pleiotropy): this makes deleterious
mutations less impactful, thus creating an adaptive bias that shapes the
fitness effects of variation (category 2) [52]. This reduced impact of
deleterious mutations (category 2) may also allow organisms to tolerate
higher mutation rates (category 1) - showing that determinants in different
categories can interact in a reciprocal manner: the processes that provide
variation (category 1), bias the fitness effects of variation (category 2), and
shape the selection process (category 3) are not independent of each other.

                                                                                                               31
Our view on the determinants of evolvability is suited to different
approaches to evolution and evolvability. The first category (providing
variation) contains not only mechanisms that provide new mutations, but
also mechanisms that facilitate major innovations (however, the relationship
between evolvability and major innovations is not yet well understood).
Similarly, the second category considers not only instances of genotypic and
developmental biases, but also includes broader ideas such as phenotypic
accommodation and the theory of facilitated variation [20,53­55]. Finally,
the third category considers not only genetic mechanisms (such as horizontal
gene transfer, which also allows beneficial variants to spread more quickly
[56]) but also - amongst others - niche construction, where organisms shape
their own selective environment [57].

Explicitly considering timescale resolves apparent
incongruencies

Determinants differ in the timescale on which they act ­ thus, when
comparing evolvability across biological systems, the outcome is crucially
dependent on timescale (see figure 2). Considering timescale can help to
resolve several apparent discrepancies.

This is exemplified by comparing determinants that provide variation
(category 1): consider the impact of standing genetic variation [58] and the
impact of mechanisms generating variation [59] on evolvability ([1], see Box
1). In the short term, adaptation is more strongly influenced by standing
genetic variation, whereas mechanisms generating and maintaining variation
are of greater significance when considering longer-term evolutionary
trajectories [60].

Some approach evolvability in terms of speed of evolution [61], whilst others
approach it in terms of attained level of adaptation [38,62]. Both aspects are
relevant [63], but they are often two sides of the same coin, which becomes
apparent when explicitly considering timescale. Consider, for example,
different modes of inheritance. Epigenetically inherited traits can provide
fast adaptation - yet this adaptation is often relatively inaccurate, given that
the relative instability of epigenetic marks impedes the reliable maintenance

32
of a certain optimal phenotype. In contrast, genetic adaptation proceeds
more slowly, but in view of the high fidelity of genetic inheritance it may, in
the long term, result in a higher level of adaptation. Therefore, epigenetic
inheritance confers higher evolvability in the short term, and genetic
inheritance confers higher evolvability in the long term [36].
Another discrepancy that can be resolved by considering timescale is the
debate over the evolvability benefits of sexual reproduction, with both
sexual and asexual reproduction being linked to increased evolvability [1,64].
All other things being equal, the response to selection (and hence the rate of
adaptive evolution) is higher under asexual reproduction, as in case of sexual
reproduction selection can only act upon the additive component of genetic
variation [65] (category 3). Therefore, asexual reproduction facilitates
evolvability in the short term. In the longer term, sexual reproduction confers
a higher evolvability, as the slower speed of evolution is outweighed by the
ability to better explore the fitness landscape and reach global rather than
local peaks. The claims that sexual reproduction increases evolvability, and
the claims that asexual reproduction increases evolvability can thus both be
true, just at different timescales (see figure 2). Overall, the above examples
show that the effects and relative importance of determinants vary over
time. Therefore, explicitly considering timescale is crucial when studying
evolvability.

                                                                                                               33
Figure 2: When studying evolvability it is important to explicitly consider timescale;
observing at different times can lead to different conclusions. Suppose that we observe the
ability of two fish species to adapt to a new food source. Our conclusions on which of the two
is more evolvable (is better able to adapt to the new selective challenge) will depend on the
time at which we observe their level of adaptation. At time t1, the purple fish species is more
adapted (and hence seems more evolvable), but at time t2, the green fish species is more
adapted (and hence seems more evolvable). This occurs because rates of adaptation are not
constant across time - thus, being explicit about the timescale of observation can resolve
apparent discrepancies when comparing the evolvability of different organisms.

Accounting for environmental context shows that
determinants differ in scope

Evolvability is the capability to undergo adaptive evolution; it is therefore
necessary to consider in relation to which environmental challenge such
adaptation arises. This reveals an additional property of determinants: their
scope. Some determinants affect evolvability across many different
environmental challenges; we consider these to have a broad scope. For
example, mutation rates impact evolvability in virtually all environments.
Other determinants have a narrow scope as they only shape evolvability in a
restricted set of environments. For example, the grouping of temperature-
relevant genes on one chromosome in yeast [42] only enhances evolvability

34
to a change in temperature; it does not impact adaptation to other
environmental challenges.

The scope of determinants pushes the researcher to consider the range of
environments in which a determinant is relevant. Determinants relevant for
adaptation to one environment may not be as relevant when considering
adaptation to another. For example, in the radiation of Darwin's finches,
developmental biases in beak development have been implicated in their
adaptation to different seed sizes [66,67]. However, evolvability with regards
to beak shape will not be relevant with regards to other environmental
challenges, such as temperature regulation or predator escape. By contrast,
a higher mutation rate will affect evolutionary adaptation with regards to
many different environmental challenges.

Two perspectives on evolvability

A very different distinction does not refer to the determinants of evolvability,
but to the scholars studying evolvability. Depending on their scientific
discipline, research question, or model system, scholars differ in whether
they view evolvability as "general" or "specific" with regards to
environmental challenges (figure 3). Scientists adopting a specific evolvability
perspective refer to the capability of a biological system to undergo adaptive
evolution to a specific environment or a specific challenge ­ the main focus
therefore is on how well a biological system can meet a specific selective
target. This perspective is useful when studying adaptation to a particular
challenge, e.g. when exploring the capability of bacteria to evolve resistance
to a particular antibiotic, the capability of a virus to evolve resistance to a
vaccine, or the ability of an endangered species to evolve adaptations to a
specific anthropogenic threat [68,69]. In contrast, scientists adopting a
general evolvability perspective view evolvability as the capability of a
biological system to adapt to a wide spectrum of environments or of
challenges ­ thus effectively considering evolvability irrespective of the
environmental context. This perspective is useful when considering
adaptation to unpredictable environments, and is also frequently used in
studies exploring the link between evolvability and diversification [62,70,71].

                                                                                                               35
Whilst specific and general evolvability are both useful conceptualizations of
evolvability, insights gained from one do not necessarily translate into
insights about the other. Depending on the chosen perspective, the same
observation can lead to different conclusions (figure 3), it informs what
questions are asked, and affects how results are interpreted. Consider a
population that is able to adapt rapidly to a specific challenge, such as a
bacterial strain quickly evolving resistance to a particular antibiotic. From the
perspective of specific evolvability this strain has a high evolvability, whilst
viewed from the perspective of general evolvability this single instance of
rapid adaptation says nothing about the ability of the strain to adapt to other
challenges (heat stress, pH stress, etc.). The distinction between general and
specific evolvability should not be confused with the scope of a determinant:
the latter is a property of a determinant, whereas the former concerns two
different ways of viewing evolvability.

36
Figure 3: Specific and general evolvability represent two different perspectives on
evolvability. This influences questions and interpretation of results in evolvability research.
Different scientists can reach different conclusions from the same observations. This figure
illustrates how scientists with different perspectives (on the left: specific evolvability, on the
right: general evolvability) interpret the same observations regarding adaptation very
differently. Observation A: A fish species can easily adapt to using cookies as a food source.
From the specific evolvability perspective (S1), this is interpreted as high evolvability with
respect to cookies. From the general evolvability perspective (G1), it is not possible to draw
conclusions, since no information is available regarding the ability to adapt to other food
sources (environments). Observation B: A fish species cannot adapt to using cookies as food
source, but (e.g. due to modular mouth parts) can undergo adaptation to a wide range of
other food sources (environments). From a specific evolvability perspective (S2), this is
interpreted as a lack of evolvability with regards to cookies. From a general evolvability
perspective (G2), the ability to adapt to a wide range of different environments (ability to deal
with dietary shifts) indicates a high evolvability. Notice that the two perspectives characterize
scholars of evolvability, rather than the determinants of evolvability. The two perspectives
should therefore not be confused with determinants acting at short vs long timescales, or with
determinants having narrow vs broad scope.

                                                                                                               37
Concluding remarks

Evolvability is an intricate concept with many facets. Different facets are at
centre stage in different lines of research. Furthermore, evolvability is
conceptualized in two different ways: specific and general evolvability. Being
aware of these differences is crucial for fostering an integrated and
structured view on evolvability research.
Throughout we argue that evolvability should not be studied as a
phenomenon per se, but as a product of the mechanisms underlying it.
Moreover, it is useful to clearly distinguish between determinants that
provide variation, shape the effect of variation on fitness and shape the
selection process. A structured mechanistic approach clarifies debates in the
literature and provides a sound basis for studying the evolution of
evolvability.
Evolvability cannot be quantified by a single number. Both speed of evolution
and level of adaptation are relevant, but they are not independent. Scholars
should explicitly consider this when conducting evolvability research.
We hope that the proposed mechanistic approach facilitates communication
across disciplines, helps to address major questions regarding evolvability
(see Outstanding Questions), and provides guidelines for designing future
studies on evolvability.

38
Box 1. Definitions of evolvability

Here we will briefly discuss some definitions of evolvability, as they provide
a good overview of the diversity of approaches in the field of evolvability
research [63,72,73]. One important early definition revolves around the
additive genetic coefficient of variation. It defines evolvability as the ability
to respond to selection as governed by the presence or absence of standing
genetic variation (often assessed in the G matrix) [38,58,74]. Another
important perspective was given by Wagner and Altenberg [59], who made
a distinction between variation and variability, i.e. the propensity of
characters to vary. Evolvability is then considered not as the currently
present variation but instead as the ability to generate new variation. A
third, different perspective on evolvability considers the ability to generate
major innovations [75,76]. For a comprehensive review of these
developments, the reader is referred to [1]. Note that these definitions of
evolvability are reflected in our first category of determinants, as they all
view evolvability as determined by the presence or provisioning of variation.

One additional aspect of the definitions of evolvability (also called
"evolutionary potential" or "adaptive capacity") is the relationship between
variation and adaptation. While earlier treatments (as discussed in [1])
define evolvability as the ability of a biological system to evolve, irrespective
of whether evolution is adaptive or not, recent definitions tend to restrict
the concept to adaptive processes. For example, Payne and Wagner [14]
combine the aspects of variation and adaptation when they define
evolvability as "... the ability of a biological system to produce phenotypic
variation that is both heritable and adaptive". Other definitions in this vein
have been provided by [7,38,60,77­81].

Following the general trend in the field, we here focus on adaptive evolution
as well. When defining evolvability as the "capability of a biological system
to undergo adaptive evolution" we do not mean the presence or absence of
this capability, but rather we consider its degree in a continuous fashion.
Adopting an adaptive perspective does by no means imply that non-adaptive
processes (e.g. genetic drift) are irrelevant; in fact, many of the determinants

                                                                                                              39
of evolvability reflect such processes (e.g. mutation). However, there are at
least two reasons for focusing on adaptive evolution. First, many
applications of evolvability (e.g. evolution of antibiotic resistance,
adaptation to anthropogenic change) consider the adaptation to
environmental challenges. Second, relating the rate and outcome of
evolution to underlying selection pressures provides a yardstick, making it
possible to differentiate between organismal and environmental features
[38] and allowing comparisons across organisms. Both features are
important first steps toward a predictive theory of evolution [82].

Acknowledgments

We thank the members of the MARM group and the Komdeur group at the
University of Groningen for stimulating discussion and comments on the
manuscript, and Carlotta Borgato for assistance with the design of the
figures. We also thank Armin Moczek, David Berger, and two anonymous
reviewers for their helpful comments and insights. F.J.W., S.T. and T.J.B.v.E.
acknowledge funding from the European Research Council (ERC Advanced
Grant No. 789240); J.M.R. is supported by a GELIFES scholarship from the
University of Groningen. Finally, we thank the imaginary fish of unknown
species that volunteered to be fed imaginary baked goods for the
advancement of science.

Glossary

Biological system: We here define a biological system to be any biological
entity that can be subject to evolution by natural selection.

Cryptic genetic variation: Standing genetic variation that has little effect on
phenotypic variation under normal conditions, but generates variation
under changed conditions. The release of this variation can facilitate (or
hamper) adaptation and thus impact evolvability.

Developmental bias: The developmental mechanisms underlying a trait can
introduce biases in the variation in the phenotype, even if the underlying
mutations are unbiased. These biases can be (but need not be) aligned with
the direction of selection, in which case they facilitate adaptive evolution.

40
Developmental canalization: Robustness to genetic or environmental
perturbations frequently exhibited by developmental systems, leading to a
stable phenotypic outcome.
Evolutionary capacitor: Mechanism that prevents the expression of genetic
variation under some conditions, thus allowing the accumulation of cryptic
genetic variation, and `releases' this variation under other conditions, thus
exposing it to selection.
Gene regulatory network (GRN) model: Model that explicitly represents the
genotype-to-phenotype-map, as a complex network of regulatory
interactions between genes. GRN models have been studied extensively in
the context of evolutionary developmental biology and evolvability.
Modularity: The ability of subsets of a system ("modules") to function
independently of other parts of the system (see [51]). Modularity can impact
evolvability in various ways: for example, independent modules can be easily
combined in different ways, and furthermore do not interfere with each
other's functioning.
Phenotypic plasticity: The expression of different phenotypes by the same
genotype in response to environmental conditions. The impact of
phenotypic plasticity on evolvability is subject to much debate (see for
example [10,47­50]): their relationship is complex and not yet well
understood.
Robustness: The capability of the state of a biological system to persist
under (environmental or genetic) perturbation. For example, robustness
may refer to the ability to maintain a certain phenotype in the face of
environmental fluctuations or genetic mutations. Intuitively one might
consider evolvability (the ability to change) and robustness (the ability to
withstand change) to be opposed, however, it has been shown that they can
be two sides of the same coin [3,7].

                                                                                                              41
References

1 Pigliucci, M. (2008) Is evolvability evolvable? Nat. Rev. Genet. 9, 75­
        82, DOI: 10.1038/nrg2278

2 Rutten, J.P. et al. (2019) Adapting the engine to the fuel: mutator
        populations can reduce the mutational load by reorganizing their
        genome structure. BMC Evol. Biol. 19, 1­17, DOI: 10.1186/s12862-
        019-1507-z

3 Wagner, A. (2008) Robustness and evolvability: a paradox resolved.
        Proc. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 275, 91­100, DOI: 10.1098/rspb.2007.1137

4 Crombach, A. and Hogeweg, P. (2008) Evolution of evolvability in
        gene regulatory networks. PLoS Comput. Biol. 4, e1000112, DOI:
        10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000112

5 Turcotte, M.M. et al. (2011) The impact of rapid evolution on
        population dynamics in the wild: experimental test of eco-
        evolutionary dynamics. Ecol. Lett. 14, 1084­1092, DOI:
        10.1111/j.1461-0248.2011.01676.x

6 Netz, C. et al. (2021) Complex eco-evolutionary dynamics induced
        by the coevolution of predator­prey movement strategies. Evol.
        Ecol. 1­17, DOI: 10.1007/s10682-021-10140-x

7 Masel, J. and Trotter, M. V. (2010) Robustness and evolvability.
        Trends Genet. 26, 406­414, DOI: 10.1016/j.tig.2010.06.002

8 Hogeweg, P. (2012) Toward a theory of multilevel evolution: long-
        term information integration shapes the mutational landscape and
        enhances evolvability. In Evolutionary Systems Biology (Soyer, O. S.,
        ed), pp. 195­224, Springer, New York, NY. DOI:10.1007/978-1-4614-
        3567-9_10

9 Watson, R.A. and Szathmáry, E. (2016) How can evolution learn?
        Trends Ecol. Evol. 31, 147­157, DOI: 10.1016/j.tree.2015.11.009

42
10 van Gestel, J. and Weissing, F.J. (2016) Regulatory mechanisms link
        phenotypic plasticity to evolvability. Sci. Rep. 6, 24524, DOI:
        10.1038/srep24524

11 Johansson, F. et al. (2021) Natural selection mediated by seasonal
        time constraints increases the alignment between evolvability and
        developmental plasticity. Evolution (N. Y). 75, , DOI:
        10.1111/evo.14147

12 Woods, R.J. et al. (2011) Second-order selection for evolvability in a
        large Escherichia coli population. Science 331, 1433­1436, DOI:
        10.1126/science.1198914

13 Martín-Serra, A. et al. (2019) Phenotypic integration and modularity
        drives skull shape divergence in the arctic fox (Vulpes lagopus) from
        the commander islands. Biol. Lett. 15, 20190406, DOI:
        10.1098/rsbl.2019.0406

14 Payne, J.L. and Wagner, A. (2019) The causes of evolvability and
        their evolution. Nat. Rev. Genet. 20, 24­38, DOI: 10.1038/s41576-
        018-0069-z

15 Sprouffske, K. et al. (2018) High mutation rates limit evolutionary
        adaptation in Escherichia coli. PLoS Genet. 14, e1007324, DOI:
        10.1371/journal.pgen.1007324

16 Consuegra, J. et al. (2021) Insertion-sequence-mediated mutations
        both promote and constrain evolvability during a long-term
        experiment with bacteria. Nat. Commun. 12, 1­12, DOI:
        10.1038/s41467-021-21210-7

17 Tenaillon, O. et al. (2016) Tempo and mode of genome evolution in
        a 50,000-generation experiment. Nature 536, 165­170, DOI:
        10.1038/nature18959

18 Hu, Y. et al. (2020) Developmental bias in horned dung beetles and
        its contributions to innovation, adaptation, and resilience. Evol. Dev.
        22, 165­180, DOI: 10.1111/ede.12310

                                                                                                              43
19 Uller, T. et al. (2018) Developmental bias and evolution: a regulatory
        network perspective. Genetics 209, 949­966, DOI:
        10.1534/genetics.118.300995

20 Gerhart, J. and Kirschner, M. (2007) The theory of facilitated
        variation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 104, 8582­8589, DOI:
        10.1073/pnas.0701035104

21 Jernvall, J. (2000) Linking development with generation of novelty in
        mammalian teeth. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 97, 2641­2645, DOI:
        10.1073/pnas.050586297

22 Thomas, J.A. et al. (2010) A generation time effect on the rate of
        molecular evolution in invertebrates. Mol. Biol. Evol. 27, 1173­1180,
        DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msq009

23 Gandon, S. and Michalakis, Y. (2002) Local adaptation, evolutionary
        potential and host-parasite coevolution: interactions between
        migration, mutation, population size and generation time. J. Evol.
        Biol. 15, 451­462, DOI: 10.1046/j.1420-9101.2002.00402.x

24 Sniegowski, P.D. et al. (2000) The evolution of mutation rates:
        separating causes from consequences. BioEssays 22, 1057­1066,
        DOI: 10.1002/1521-1878(200012)22:12<1057::AID-BIES3>3.0.CO;2-
        W

25 Hodgkinson, A. and Eyre-Walker, A. (2011) Variation in the mutation
        rate across mammalian genomes. Nat. Rev. Genet. 12, 756­766,
        DOI: 10.1038/nrg3098

26 Martincorena, I. et al. (2012) Evidence of non-random mutation
        rates suggests an evolutionary risk management strategy. Nature
        485, 95­98, DOI: 10.1038/nature10995

27 MacLean, R.C. et al. (2013) Evaluating evolutionary models of stress-
        induced mutagenesis in bacteria. Nat. Rev. Genet. 14, 221­227, DOI:
        10.1038/nrg3415

44
28 Aboelsoud, R. and Kurtz, J. (2019) An HSP90-regulated reduced-eye
        phenotype in Tribolium shows fitness benefits and thus provides
        evidence for evolutionary capacitance. bioRxiv 690727, DOI:
        10.1101/690727

29 Rutherford, S.L. and Lindquist, S. (1998) HSP90 as a capacitor for
        morphological evolution. Nature 396, 336­342, DOI: 10.1038/24550

30 Bergman, A. and Siegal, M.L. (2003) Evolutionary capacitance as a
        general feature of complex gene networks. Nat. 2003 4246948 424,
        549­552, DOI: 10.1038/nature01765

31 Huey, R.B. et al. (2003) Behavioral drive versus behavioral inertia in
        evolution: a null model approach. Am. Nat. 161, 357­366, DOI:
        10.1086/346135

32 Snell-Rood, E.C. et al. (2016) Effects of parental care on the
        accumulation and release of cryptic genetic variation: review of
        mechanisms and a case study of dung beetles. Evol. Ecol. 30, 251­
        265, DOI: 10.1007/s10682-015-9813-4

33 Golicz, A.A. et al. (2020) Pangenomics comes of age: from bacteria
        to plant and animal applications. Trends Genet. 36, 132­145, DOI:
        10.1016/j.tig.2019.11.006

34 Jackson, R.W. et al. (2011) The influence of the accessory genome
        on bacterial pathogen evolution. Mob. Genet. Elements 1, 55­65,
        DOI: 10.4161/mge.1.1.16432

35 van Dijk, B. (2020) Can mobile genetic elements rescue genes from
        extinction? Curr. Genet. 66, 1069­1071, DOI: 10.1007/s00294-020-
        01104-9

36 Bonduriansky, R. and Day, T. (2018) Extended Heredity: A New
        Understanding of Inheritance and Evolution, Princeton University
        Press.

                                                                                                              45
37 Adrian-Kalchhauser, I. et al. (2020) Understanding "Non-genetic"
        inheritance: insights from molecular-evolutionary crosstalk. Trends
        Ecol. Evol. 35, 1078­1089, DOI: 10.1016/j.tree.2020.08.011

38 Kokko, H. et al. (2017) Can evolution supply what ecology demands?
        Trends Ecol. Evol. 32, 187­197, DOI: 10.1016/j.tree.2016.12.005

39 Hendrikse, J.L. et al. (2007) Evolvability as the proper focus of
        evolutionary developmental biology. Evol. Dev. 9, 393­401, DOI:
        10.1111/j.1525-142X.2007.00176.x

40 Allen, C.E. et al. (2008) Differences in the selection response of
        serially repeated color pattern characters: standing variation,
        development, and evolution. BMC Evol. Biol. 8, 1­13, DOI:
        10.1186/1471-2148-8-94

41 van Gestel, J. and Weissing, F.J. (2018) Is plasticity caused by single
        genes? Nature 555, E19­E20, DOI: 10.1038/nature25495

42 Yona, A.H. et al. (2012) Chromosomal duplication is a transient
        evolutionary solution to stress. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 109,
        21010­21015, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1211150109

43 Marshall, J.A.R. (2011) Group selection and kin selection: formally
        equivalent approaches. Trends Ecol. Evol. 26, 325­332, DOI:
        10.1016/j.tree.2011.04.008

44 Boomsma, J.J. (2009) Lifetime monogamy and the evolution of
        eusociality. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 364, 3191­3207, DOI:
        10.1098/rstb.2009.0101

45 Salathé, M. et al. (2008) The state of affairs in the kingdom of the
        red queen. Trends Ecol. Evol. 23, 439­445, DOI:
        10.1016/j.tree.2008.04.010

46 Ivens, A.B.F. (2015) Cooperation and conflict in ant (hymenoptera:
        formicidae) farming mutualisms - a review. Myrmecological News
        21, 19­36, DOI: 10.2/JQUERY.MIN.JS

46
47 Gibert, P. et al. (2019) Phenotypic plasticity, global change, and the
        speed of adaptive evolution. Curr. Opin. Insect Sci. 35, 34­40, DOI:
        10.1016/j.cois.2019.06.007

48 Moczek, A.P. (2015) Developmental plasticity and evolution - quo
        vadis? Heredity (Edinb). 115, 302­305, DOI: 10.1038/hdy.2015.14

49 Brun-Usan, M. et al. (2020) Developmental models reveal the role
        of phenotypic plasticity in explaining genetic evolvability. bioRxiv
        2020.06.29.179226, DOI: 10.1101/2020.06.29.179226

50 Visser, B. et al. (2021) Phenotypic plasticity explains apparent
        reverse evolution of fat synthesis in parasitic wasps. Sci. Rep. 11, 1­
        13, DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-86736-8

51 Bhattacharyya, R.P. et al. (2006) Domains, motifs, and scaffolds: the
        role of modular interactions in the evolution and wiring of cell
        signaling circuits. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 75, 655­680, DOI:
        10.1146/annurev.biochem.75.103004.142710

52 Wagner, G.P. and Zhang, J. (2011) The pleiotropic structure of the
        genotype-phenotype map: the evolvability of complex organisms.
        Nat. Rev. Genet. 12, 204­213, DOI: 10.1038/nrg2949

53 Kirschner, M.W. (2015) The road to facilitated variation. In
        Conceptual Change in Biology. Boston Studies in the Philosophy and
        History of Science (Love, A. C., ed), pp. 199­217, Springer,
        Dordrecht DOI:10.1007/978-94-017-9412-1_9

54 Badyaev, A. V. et al. (2017) Most colorful example of genetic
        assimilation? exploring the evolutionary destiny of recurrent
        phenotypic accommodation. Am. Nat. 190, 266­280, DOI:
        10.1086/692327

55 West-Eberhard, M.J. (2005) Phenotypic accommodation: adaptive
        innovation due to developmental plasticity. J. Exp. Zool. Part B Mol.
        Dev. Evol. 304, 610­618, DOI: 10.1002/jez.b.21071

                                                                                                              47
56 Chu, H.Y. et al. (2018) Assessing the benefits of horizontal gene
        transfer by laboratory evolution and genome sequencing. BMC Evol.
        Biol. 18, 1­21, DOI: 10.1186/s12862-018-1164-7

57 Laland, K. et al. (2016) An introduction to niche construction theory.
        Evol. Ecol. 30, 191­202, DOI: 10.1007/s10682-016-9821-z

58 Houle, D. (1992) Comparing evolvability and variability of
        quantitative traits. Genetics 130, 195­204, DOI:
        10.1093/genetics/130.1.195

59 Wagner, G.P. and Altenberg, L. (1996) Perspective: complex
        adaptations and the evolution of evolvability. Evolution (N. Y). 50,
        967, DOI: 10.2307/2410639

60 Wagner, G.P. and Draghi, J.A. (2010) Evolution of evolvability. In
        Evolution--the Extended Synthesis pp. 379­400, The MIT Press
        DOI:10.7551/mitpress/9780262513678.003.0015

61 Hu, Y. et al. (2016) Evolution in an extreme environment:
        developmental biases and phenotypic integration in the adaptive
        radiation of antarctic notothenioids. BMC Evol. Biol. 2016 161 16, 1­
        13, DOI: 10.1186/S12862-016-0704-2

62 Yang, A.S. (2001) Modularity, evolvability, and adaptive radiations: a
        comparison of the hemi- and holometabolous insects. Evol. Dev. 3,
        59­72, DOI: 10.1046/J.1525-142X.2001.003002059.X

63 Brown, R.L. (2014) What evolvability really is. Br. J. Philos. Sci. 65,
        549­572, DOI: 10.1093/bjps/axt014

64 Eshel, I. (1991) Game theory and population dynamics in complex
        genetical systems: the role of sex in short term and in long term
        evolution. In Game Equilibrium Models I pp. 6­28, Springer, Berlin,
        Heidelberg DOI:10.1007/978-3-662-02674-8_3

65 Roff, D.A. (1997) Evolutionary quantitative genetics. Evol. Quant.
        Genet. , DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4615-4080-9

48
66 Wagner, G.P. et al. (2007) The road to modularity. Nat. Rev. Genet.
        8, 921­931, DOI: 10.1038/nrg2267

67 Abzhanov, A. et al. (2006) The calmodulin pathway and evolution of
        elongated beak morphology in darwin's finches. Nature 442, 563­
        567, DOI: 10.1038/nature04843

68 Délye, C. et al. (2013) Deciphering the evolution of herbicide
        resistance in weeds. Trends Genet. 29, 649­658, DOI:
        10.1016/j.tig.2013.06.001

69 Kobiela, M.E. and Snell-Rood, E.C. (2020) Genetic variation
        influences tolerance to a neonicotinoid insecticide in 3 butterfly
        species. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 39, 2228­2236, DOI:
        10.1002/etc.4845

70 Rabosky, D.L. et al. (2013) Rates of speciation and morphological
        evolution are correlated across the largest vertebrate radiation.
        Nat. Commun. 4, 1­8, DOI: 10.1038/ncomms2958

71 Stroud, J.T. and Losos, J.B. (2016) Ecological opportunity and
        adaptive radiation. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Evol. Syst. 47, 507­532, DOI:
        10.1146/annurev-ecolsys-121415-032254

72 Nuño de la Rosa, L. (2017) Computing the extended synthesis:
        mapping the dynamics and conceptual structure of the evolvability
        research front. J. Exp. Zool. Part B Mol. Dev. Evol. 328, 395­411,
        DOI: 10.1002/jez.b.22741

73 Crother, B.I. and Murray, C.M. (2019) Early usage and meaning of
        evolvability. Ecol. Evol. 9, 3784­3793, DOI: 10.1002/ece3.5002

74 Hansen, T.F. and Pélabon, C. (2021) Evolvability: a quantitative-
        genetics perspective. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Evol. Syst. 52, 153­175, DOI:
        10.1146/annurev-ecolsys-011121-021241

75 Brookfield, J.F.Y. (2001) Evolution: the evolvability enigma. Curr.
        Biol. 11, R106­R108, DOI: 10.1016/S0960-9822(01)00041-0

                                                                                                              49
76 Szathmáry, E. and Maynard Smith, J. (1995) The major evolutionary
        transitions. Nat. 1995 3746519 374, 227­232, DOI:
        10.1038/374227a0

77 Masel, J. and Siegal, M.L. (2009) Robustness: mechanisms and
        consequences. Trends Genet. 25, 395­403, DOI:
        10.1016/J.TIG.2009.07.005

78 Hansen, T.E. (2006) The evolution of genetic architecture. Annu.
        Rev. Ecol. Evol. Syst. 37, 123­157, DOI:
        10.1146/annurev.ecolsys.37.091305.110224

79 Ebner, M. et al. (2001) On neutral networks and evolvability. Proc.
        IEEE Conf. Evol. Comput. ICEC 1, 1­8, DOI:
        10.1109/CEC.2001.934363

80 Zheng, J. et al. (2020) Selection enhances protein evolvability by
        increasing mutational robustness and foldability. Science , DOI:
        10.1126/science.abb5962

81 Verd, B. et al. (2019) Modularity, criticality, and evolvability of a
        developmental gene regulatory network. Elife , DOI:
        10.7554/eLife.42832

82 Chevin, L.M. et al. (2010) Adaptation, plasticity, and extinction in a
        changing environment: towards a predictive theory. PLoS Biol. 8,
        e1000357, DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000357

50
           Chapter 3

               _______________________________________

Temperature dependence of the
mutation rate towards antibiotic

              resistance

  Timo J.B. van Eldijk*, Eleanor A. Sheridan*, Guillaume
Martin, Franz J. Weissing, Oscar P. Kuipers, G. Sander van

                               Doorn

*These authors contributed equally to the manuscript (shared first authorship)
            Under review at the Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy
                                                                                                            51
Abstract

Environmental conditions can influence mutation rates in bacteria. Fever is
a common response to infection that alters the growth conditions of
infecting bacteria. Here we examine how a temperature change, such as is
associated with fever, affects the mutation rate towards antibiotic
resistance. We used a fluctuation test to assess the mutation rate towards
antibiotic resistance in Escherichia coli at two different temperatures: 37 °C
(normal temperature) and 40 °C (fever temperature). We performed this
measurement for three different antibiotics with different modes of action:
ciprofloxacin, rifampicin, and ampicillin. In all cases, the mutation rate
towards antibiotic resistance turned out to be temperature dependent, but
in different ways. Fever temperatures led to a reduced mutation rate
towards ampicillin resistance and an elevated mutation rate towards
ciprofloxacin and rifampicin resistance. This study opens a new avenue to
mitigate the emergence of antibiotic resistance by coordinating the choice
of an antibiotic with the decision of whether or not to suppress fever when
treating a patient. Hence, optimised combinations of antibiotics and fever
suppression strategies may be a new weapon in the battle against
antibiotic resistance.

Introduction

Antibiotic resistance represents a major societal challenge (1). The
emergence of antibiotic resistance is at its core an evolutionary process, with
recent research showing that antibiotic resistance can evolve within a patient
within just three days (2). More specifically, it may be viewed as an
`evolutionary rescue' process (3, 4); when treatment commences, a bacterial
population needs to rapidly evolve resistance before it is driven to extinction
by antibiotic exposure. The probability that the bacterial population evolves
resistance is dependent on the rate of occurrence of mutations that confer
resistance. The higher the mutation rate towards resistance, the greater the
probability that antibiotic treatment fails due to the emergence of resistance
(3, 4).

Mutation rates in bacteria are not constant but are instead dependent on
environmental conditions such as temperature (5, 6). Most biochemical

52
processes increase with temperature, so it has been speculated that
mutation rate would be positively associated with temperature (7, 8). In
addition, bacterial mutation rates can be regulated to become elevated in
stressful environments, a phenomenon known as stress-induced
mutagenesis (9). Pathogenic bacteria may therefore express a different
mutation rate when their (human) host responds to an infection with fever ­
an increase in the body temperature above 38.3 °C (10) ­ which can create
mildly stressful conditions for an infecting bacterial population. This leads to
a question that, to our knowledge, has not been addressed before: How does
the increase in temperature associated with fever influence the mutation
rate towards antibiotic resistance? If in bacteria mutation rates towards
antibiotic resistance were indeed elevated at fever temperatures, fever
suppression (using widely available antipyretic drugs such as acetaminophen
(10)) could be a successful tactic to lower the mutation rate and thus combat
the emergence of resistance.

Therefore, we here examine the temperature dependence of the mutation
rate towards antibiotic resistance in Escherichia coli. We assessed the
mutation rate towards resistance at two temperatures: 37 °C (representing
a normal body temperature) and 40 °C (representing a typical fever
temperature). We performed these measurements using a fluctuation-test
approach to determine the in-vitro mutation rate towards antibiotic
resistance for three different antibiotics, each with a different mode of
action: ciprofloxacin (a topoisomerase and DNA-gyrase inhibitor) (11),
rifampicin (a DNA-dependent RNA polymerase inhibitor) (12) and ampicillin
(a peptidoglycan transpeptidase inhibitor) (13).

Results

Temperature dependence of the mutation rate

We used a fluctuation-test approach to assess the mutation rate towards
antibiotic resistance (14, 15, 16, 17). As shown in Figure 1, the mutation rate
depended on temperature, yet the direction of this dependency differed
between antibiotics. The mutation rate towards ciprofloxacin and rifampicin
resistance was higher at 40 °C than at 37 °C. In contrast, the mutation rate

                                                                                                               53
towards ampicillin resistance was higher at 37 °C than at 40 °C. The patterns
of temperature dependence were for each antibiotic robust to using
different methods for quantifying mutation rates, including different
estimators of final population size (results for CFP fluorescence see
supplement 2.4), different estimation methods (maximum likelihood &
generating function) and different lifetime models (Luria-Delbrück model
with exponential lifetimes, Haldane model with constant lifetimes and
inhomogeneous model; see supplement 2.5).

Figure 1. Effect of temperature on the mutation rate towards antibiotic resistance. At least
three replicate experiments were conducted for each of the three antibiotics: (A)
ciprofloxacin, (B) rifampicin, and (C) ampicillin. Points show the estimated mutation rate for a
given experiment and temperature, with error bars corresponding to ± 1 standard error. Lines
join the result for 37 °C and 40 °C for a single experiment; the difference between the
mutation rate at 37 °C and 40 °C was statistically significant for all experiments (for
ciprofloxacin the three p-values ranged between 0.001 and 0.035; for rifampicin, the three p-
values ranged between 0.0002 and 0.003; for ampicillin, the five p-values were all
below 0.009). Circular points are for experiments performed at the University of Groningen,
Netherlands; triangular points are for those performed at the University of Montpellier,
France (protocol and sample size for these experiments deviate slightly, see supplement 1.3).

54
The estimation of population sizes was based on CFU counts. We used the estimation method
maximum likelihood, and the Luria-Delbrück exponential lifetime model (default settings in
FLAN (18)).

Sequencing
To confirm that the colonies growing on plates containing antibiotics are
indeed resistant mutants, a small set of mutants (three per temperature per
antibiotic, 18 in total) was fully sequenced. We managed to clearly identify
mutations in resistance genes for most mutants (13/18; see supplement 2.3).

Temperature-dependent antibiotic efficacy
To determine whether the observed changes in mutation rate (i.e. the rate
of appearance of resistant phenotypes) were due to temperature-dependent
antibiotic efficacy, we assessed antibiotic efficacy at the two experimental
temperatures, also accounting for the liquid culture temperature (see
supplement 2.6). For ampicillin, we found that it was consistently more
effective at 40 °C than 37 °C. For rifampicin, the results were inconclusive due
to an unexpectedly low sample size. For ciprofloxacin, we did not find a
consistent effect of temperature on antibiotic efficacy. Instead, we found
that the efficacy increased slightly when the protocol included a temperature
change, i.e. when the antibiotic incubation temperature was different from
the liquid culture temperature. In our fluctuation-test protocol, such a
change in temperature does not occur, therefore this does not impact our
mutation-rate estimates.

Discussion

We found that the mutation rate towards antibiotic resistance was
temperature-dependent. A three-degree temperature change, such as the
one associated with fever, altered the rate at which resistant mutants
appeared by almost an order of magnitude for all three antibiotics
considered. All else being equal, a higher rate of appearance of mutants with
a resistant phenotype (mutation rate towards antibiotic resistance) makes
evolutionary rescue more probable (3). This would thus increase the
probability that a bacterial population successfully evolves resistance, which
in turn could lead to treatment failure (2, 19). Furthermore, the average
timeframe in which resistance evolves will be shorter. These effects should

                                                                                                               55
be especially pronounced if the standing genetic variation at the start of
infection is relatively low, as would be expected due to the usually small size
of the initial inoculum (3, 20). Besides the mutation rate, other parameters
that determine the probability of evolutionary rescue, such as the rate of
population decay or the establishment probability of mutants (see (3)), may
also be affected by temperature, a possible avenue for further study.

For ciprofloxacin (a topoisomerase inhibitor) (11) and rifampicin (a DNA-
dependent RNA-polymerase inhibitor) (12) we found that fever
temperatures led to an increase in the mutation rate. These findings are
consistent with the general finding that mutation rates are higher under
suboptimal conditions. Such stress-induced mutagenesis could be an evolved
response to facilitate evolutionary rescue under stressful conditions (9).
However, in the case of temperature it could also be a side-effect of the fact
that all biochemical processes (including those leading to mutation) are
accelerated at higher temperatures (5, 8). Regardless of the mechanism, this
suggests that all else being equal, resistance towards these antibiotics would
be more likely to evolve under fever temperatures.

For ampicillin (a transpeptidase inhibitor) (13), contrary to our expectations,
fever temperatures led to a decrease in the mutation rate towards
resistance. This result was replicated in two different labs (Groningen and
Montpellier), demonstrating its robustness. The observed effect of
temperature on the mutation rate (i.e. rate of appearance of resistant
phenotypes) could be due to a difference in the rate at which mutations
appear in the genome (genomic mutation rate) or to a difference in the
proportion of genomic mutations that convey resistance. The proportion of
mutations that convey resistance could be influenced by temperature if the
efficacy of an antibiotic is temperature-dependent (i.e. mutations that
convey resistance at one temperature do not convey resistance at another
temperature). Therefore, we conducted an experiment which showed an
increase in the efficacy of ampicillin at 40 °C (see supplement 2.6, including
results for ciprofloxacin and rifampicin). Thus, the surprising result for
ampicillin may largely be explained by this increase in efficacy of ampicillin at
the higher temperature, as some of the mutations conveying resistance at 37

56
°C may not be able to do so at 40 °C, leading to a decrease in the rate of
occurrence of resistant mutants. A recent study by Cruz-Loya et al. (21) also
found indications for the temperature-dependent efficacy of ampicillin,
showing that the presence of ampicillin caused a greater reduction in growth
rates at higher temperatures. They hypothesised that this may be due to a
synergistic effect between antibiotic-induced cell wall damage and the
increased membrane permeability that occurs at higher temperatures.
Regardless of the exact mechanism of temperature dependence, our
experiments demonstrate that the rate of appearance of mutants resistant
to ampicillin is temperature dependent, possibly due to the temperature-
dependent efficacy of the antibiotic. It is ultimately the rate of appearance
of resistant mutants that determines the probability of resistance evolution.
Therefore, all else being equal, ampicillin resistance is less likely to evolve
under fever temperatures.

The difference in the mutation rates observed at 37 °C and 40 °C is consistent
between different repeats of the same experiment, and for ampicillin even
showed replicability across labs. However, for all antibiotics, the estimates of
the mutation rate differed considerably (sometimes by an order of
magnitude) between replicate experiments. We can only speculate that
these differences resulted from small variations (across replicates) in
environmental conditions in the lab or small differences in the physiological
state of the pre-culture cells from which the dilute cell suspension was made.

It would be worthwhile in the future to investigate how the findings
presented here translate to different antibiotics and bacterial species.
Furthermore, it would be important to study how our current in vitro results
translate to the in vivo context, as fever has wider effects than merely
increasing temperature (such as stimulating immune function (22)). Finally,
the antibiotic concentrations considered here were chosen so as to maximise
the ability to detect changes in the mutation rate and are therefore lower
than those typically used in a clinical setting; future work should reveal
whether this pattern holds with higher, clinically relevant concentrations.

The temperature dependence of mutation rates towards antibiotic
resistance implies that the evolution of antibiotic resistance (i.e. evolvability

                                                                                                               57
in the context of antibiotic resistance (23)) is influenced by temperature. This
study opens up a new way to combat the emergence of antibiotic resistance:
decisions regarding fever suppression could be leveraged to minimise the
mutation rate in order to slow down or prevent the evolution of antibiotic
resistance.

Methods

Fluctuation test
We used Escherichia coli strain REL4548-CFP-lux, a strain from Lenski's long-
term evolution experiment (24, 25, 25), transformed by chromosomic
insertion of a CFP reporter gene (27) and a chromosomic insertion of lux
genes (28) (see supplement 1.1). We estimated the mutation rate towards
antibiotic resistance using a Luria-Delbrück fluctuation test (14, 15, 16, 17).
Three experiments were performed for each antibiotic in Groningen; an
additional two were conducted for ampicillin in a different lab in Montpellier
(the protocol for these additional two experiments deviates slightly and is
described in detail in the supplement 1.3). For each experiment and each
temperature (37 °C and 40 °C), 40 replicate populations, all originating from
one dilute cell suspension, were grown in liquid culture. When populations
were in the mid-exponential phase, population density and the number of
antibiotic-resistant mutants were assessed for each population. Population
density was estimated using two complementary methods: by counting
colony forming units (CFU) and by measuring the fluorescence of cyan
fluorescent protein (CFP; CFP fluorescence-based results shown in
supplement section 2.4). The number of resistant mutants in each population
was assessed by counting the number of colonies that were able to grow
when the population was plated on an antibiotic-containing agar plate. These
antibiotic-containing agar plates were incubated at the same temperature as
the populations were initially grown at; i.e., a population grown at 37 °C was
plated at 37 °C. Finally, the R package FLAN was used to infer mutation rates
using several different estimation methods (17) (shown in supplement 2.5).
We also used the FLAN package to conduct a fluctuation analysis test
comparing the mutation rates at the two temperatures. There was a
significant day effect for mutation rates, so the experiments for each

58
antibiotic were analysed in a pairwise manner ­ i.e. for each comparison,
mutation rate estimates were obtained for both temperatures on the same
day and from an identical starting culture (with the exception of one of the
two ampicillin experiments performed in Montpellier).

Temperature-dependent efficacy
We observed differences in the mutation rate (rate of appearance of
resistant phenotypes). This effect could be due to a difference in the rate at
which mutations appear in the genome (genomic mutation rate) or due to a
difference in the proportion of genomic mutations that convey resistance.
The proportion of mutations that convey resistance could be influenced by
temperature if the efficacy of an antibiotic is temperature-dependent; in that
case, mutations that convey marginal resistance at one temperature may be
ineffective in conveying resistance at another temperature. Therefore, we
conducted experiments to test for temperature-dependent antibiotic
efficacy. The experiment was carried out as above with the following
alteration: when assessing the number of resistant mutants in a population
(grown in liquid culture at 37 °C or 40 °C), each population was split in half,
and half of the population was grown on antibiotic-containing plates at 37 °C
and the other half was grown on antibiotic-containing plates at 40 °C. This
allowed us to assess whether the temperature at which the antibiotic-
containing plates were incubated, affected the number of observed mutants.
If an antibiotic is equally efficacious independent of temperature, the
temperature at which the antibiotic-containing plates are incubated should
not affect the number of mutants observed in a particular population. The
number of mutants found at each temperature from each population was
compared using a Wilcoxon signed-rank test, taking into account the liquid
culture temperature (see supplement 2.6).

Data availability

The data supporting the findings of this study is available at:
https://doi.org/10.34894/BG4ZS8

                                                                                                               59
Acknowledgements

We thank the members of the modelling adaptive response mechanisms
(MARM) group and the students from the Erasmus Mundus master
programme in evolutionary biology (MEME) for their input. We also thank
Sergio González Mollinedo for his help in the lab and Yoann Anciaux for his
insights. Furthermore, we thank Raphaël Scherrer for useful discussions
regarding statistics. F.J.W. and T.J.B.v.E. acknowledge funding from the
European Research Council (ERC Advanced Grant No. 789240).

Author contributions

This study was conceptualized by T.J.B.v.E. with input from E.A.S., G.M.,
F.J.W. and G.S.D. The initial ampicillin experiments conducted in
Montpellier (FR) were conducted and designed by T.J.B.v.E. and G.M. The
main experiments (based on the previously developed design) were
conducted in Groningen (NL) by E.A.S. under the supervision of T.J.B.v.E.
and G.S.D. During this time resources were provided by O.P.K. Analysis was
performed by E.A.S. and T.J.B.v.E. with input from F.J.W., G.M. and G.S.D.
All authors contributed to the writing of the manuscript.

Declaration of interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

60
References:

    1. Murray, C. J., Ikuta, K. S., Sharara, F., Swetschinski, L., Aguilar, G. R.,
         Gray, A., ... & Tasak, N. (2022). Global burden of bacterial
         antimicrobial resistance in 2019: a systematic analysis. The
         Lancet, 399(10325), 629-655.

    2. Tueffers, L., Barbosa, C., Bobis, I., Schubert, S., Höppner, M.,
         Rühlemann, M., ... & Schulenburg, H. (2019). Pseudomonas
         aeruginosa populations in the cystic fibrosis lung lose susceptibility
         to newly applied -lactams within 3 days. Journal of Antimicrobial
         Chemotherapy, 74(10), 2916-2925.

    3. Martin, G., Aguilée, R., Ramsayer, J., Kaltz, O., & Ronce, O. (2013).
         The probability of evolutionary rescue: towards a quantitative
         comparison between theory and evolution
         experiments. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B:
         Biological Sciences, 368(1610), 20120088.

    4. Alexander, H. K., Martin, G., Martin, O. Y., & Bonhoeffer, S. (2014).
         Evolutionary rescue: linking theory for conservation and
         medicine. Evolutionary Applications, 7(10), 1161-1179.

    5. Chu, X. L., Zhang, B. W., Zhang, Q. G., Zhu, B. R., Lin, K., & Zhang, D.
         Y. (2018). Temperature responses of mutation rate and mutational
         spectrum in an Escherichia coli strain and the correlation with
         metabolic rate. BMC Evolutionary Biology, 18(1), 1-8.

    6. Waldvogel, A. M., & Pfenninger, M. (2021). Temperature
         dependence of spontaneous mutation rates. Genome
         Research, 31(9), 1582-1589.

    7. Strack, H. B., Freese, E. B., & Freese, E. (1964). Comparison of
         mutation and inactivation rates induces by bacteriophage and
         transforming DNA by various mutagens. Mutation
         Research/Fundamental and Molecular Mechanisms of Mutagenesis,
         1(1), 10-21.

    8. Gillooly, J. F., Allen, A. P., West, G. B., & Brown, J. H. (2005). The
         rate of DNA evolution: effects of body size and temperature on the
         molecular clock. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
         102(1), 140-145.

                                                                                                               61
    9. MacLean, R. C., Torres-Barceló, C., & Moxon, R. (2013). Evaluating
         evolutionary models of stress-induced mutagenesis in
         bacteria. Nature Reviews Genetics, 14(3), 221-227.

    10. Laupland, K. B. (2009). Fever in the critically ill medical
         patient. Critical Care Medicine, 37(7), 273-278.

    11. Rehman, A., Patrick, W. M., & Lamont, I. L. (2019). Mechanisms of
         ciprofloxacin resistance in Pseudomonas aeruginosa: new
         approaches to an old problem. Journal of Medical
         Microbiology, 68(1), 1-10.

    12. Goldstein, B. P. (2014). Resistance to rifampicin: a review. The
         Journal of antibiotics, 67(9), 625-630.

    13. Lima, L. M., da Silva, B. N. M., Barbosa, G., & Barreiro, E. J. (2020).
         -lactam antibiotics: An overview from a medicinal chemistry
         perspective. European journal of medicinal chemistry, 208, 112829.

    14. Lang, G. I. (2018). Measuring mutation rates using the Luria-
         Delbrück fluctuation assay. Genome Instability: Methods and
         Protocols, 21-31.

    15. Foster, P. L. (2006). Methods for determining spontaneous
         mutation rates. Methods in Enzymology, 409, 195-213.

    16. Pope, C. F., O'Sullivan, D. M., McHugh, T. D., & Gillespie, S. H.
         (2008). A practical guide to measuring mutation rates in antibiotic
         resistance. Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy, 52(4), 1209-
         1214.

    17. Richards, H., Gomez, G., Gifford, D. R., Mazoyer, A., & Knight, C. G.
         (2019). Measuring microbial mutation rates with the fluctuation
         assay. JoVE (Journal of Visualized Experiments), (153), e60406.

    18. Mazoyer, A., Drouilhet, R., Despréaux, S., & Ycart, B. (2016). flan: An
         R package for inference on mutation models. The R Journal, 2017, 9
         (1), pp.334-351.

    19. Parkins, M. D., Rendall, J. C., & Elborn, J. S. (2012). Incidence and
         risk factors for pulmonary exacerbation treatment failures in
         patients with cystic fibrosis chronically infected with Pseudomonas
         aeruginosa. Chest, 141(2), 485-493.

62
20. Abel, S., Abel zur Wiesch, P., Davis, B. M., & Waldor, M. K. (2015).
    Analysis of bottlenecks in experimental models of infection. PLoS
    Pathogens, 11(6), e1004823.

21. Cruz-Loya, M., Tekin, E., Kang, T. M., Cardona, N., Lozano-
    Huntelman, N., Rodriguez-Verdugo, A., ... & Yeh, P. J. (2021).
    Antibiotics shift the temperature response curve of Escherichia coli
    growth. Msystems, 6(4), e00228-21.

22. Evans, S. S., Repasky, E. A., & Fisher, D. T. (2015). Fever and the
    thermal regulation of immunity: the immune system feels the
    heat. Nature Reviews Immunology, 15(6), 335-349.

23. Riederer, J. M., Tiso, S., van Eldijk, T. J., & Weissing, F. J. (2022).
    Capturing the facets of evolvability in a mechanistic
    framework. Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 37 (5), 430-439.

24. Lenski, R. E., Rose, M. R., Simpson, S. C., & Tadler, S. C. (1991).
    Long-term experimental evolution in Escherichia coli. I. Adaptation
    and divergence during 2,000 generations. The American
    Naturalist, 138(6), 1315-1341.

25. Lenski, R. E., & Travisano, M. (1994). Dynamics of adaptation and
    diversification: a 10,000-generation experiment with bacterial
    populations. Proceedings of the National Academy of
    Sciences, 91(15), 6808-6814.

26. Elena, S. F., Ekunwe, L., Hajela, N., Oden, S. A., & Lenski, R. E.
    (1998). Distribution of fitness effects caused by random insertion
    mutations in Escherichia coli. Genetica, 102, 349-358.

27. Gallet, R., Cooper, T. F., Elena, S. F., & Lenormand, T. (2012).
    Measuring selection coefficients below 10- 3: method, questions,
    and prospects. Genetics, 190(1), 175-186.

28. Howe, K., Karsi, A., Germon, P., Wills, R. W., Lawrence, M. L., &
    Bailey, R. H. (2010). Development of stable reporter system cloning
    luxCDABE genes into chromosome of Salmonella enterica serotypes
    using Tn7 transposon. BMC microbiology, 10(1), 1-8.

                                                                                                         63
      Supplementary material

Detailed Methods

Strain & media
The bacterial strain used in this experiment was Escherichia coli REL4548-
CFP-lux. The ancestor of this strain was isolated in the long-term evolution
experiment where E. coli REL606 adapted for 10000 generations to DM25
medium (Lenski et al., 1991; Lenski & Travisano, 1994; Elena et al. 1998).
Subsequently, this strain was transformed with a chromosomally integrated
constitutive high expression CFP marker (Gallet et al. 2012) and kindly
provided by Romain Gallet. Subsequently, this strain was transformed with a
chromosomally integrated lux reporter genes according to the protocol
described by Howe et al. (2010). The plasmid used for the chromosomal
integration of lux reporter genes can be found here
https://www.addgene.org/69150/. The resulting strain REL4548-CFP-lux,
which we used in our experiment, constitutively expresses CFP and lux
reporter genes, allowing for close monitoring of cell density and metabolic
activity respectively.

CFP fluorescence was measured using a BMG Labtech CLARIOstar with
excitation = 431 ± 15 nm and emission = 472 ± 15nm. All experiments were
conducted using Davis minimal media containing 1 mg/mL glucose
(DM1000). For plating, this medium was supplemented with 1.6% (w/v) agar
and, when required, antibiotics were added to give the following final
concentrations: rifampicin 10 g/mL, ciprofloxacin 0.013 g/mL, and
ampicillin 1.5 g/mL. These concentrations were chosen by plating 200 L of
culture on a range of antibiotic concentrations and selecting a concentration
that resulted in a countable number of mutants, thereby maximizing power
to detect changes in the mutation rate. Rifampicin stocks were made by
dissolving rifampicin (Sigma) in 0.1N HCl; ciprofloxacin stocks were made by

64
dissolving ciprofloxacin (Sigma) in 0.1N HCl; and ampicillin stocks were made
by dissolving ampicillin sodium (Sigma) in sterilized distilled water.

Fluctuation test

To measure the mutation rate at two different temperatures, a fluctuation
test was performed. To set up the experiment, E. coli REL4548-CFP-lux was
grown to stationary phase overnight at 37 °C (incubator: INCU-line, IL 56
Premium; agitation: Grant-Bio PMS 1000i, shaking = 540 PM). For the
ampicillin fluctuation tests, the stationary-phase culture was diluted with a
factor 106 to create the diluted cell suspension needed to initialize the
fluctuation test. For ciprofloxacin and rifampicin, the stationary-phase
culture was refreshed after approximately 24 hours. This was done by
diluting the culture with a factor 10 and growing it for another 2.5 hours at
37 °C. Refreshing the overnight culture ensured that all cells were in the
exponential growth phase prior to the start of the experiment, minimizing
the lag time and thereby reducing possible differences in final population
densities caused by stochastic variations in lag time. The refreshed culture
was then adjusted to an OD600 value of 0.5 and diluted with a factor 2.5 x 105,
creating the diluted cell suspension needed to initialize the fluctuation text

In all experiments, the diluted cell suspension was then used to initialize the
fluctuation test, by establishing 40 populations in each of three 96-well plates
(Greiner bio one, clear), for a total of 120 populations. To minimize the effect
of evaporation only the inner wells of the plate were used, with the wells
bordering the edge of the plate filled with medium. Each population
consisted of 200 µL of diluted culture, with each population containing
approximately 100 cells for the ampicillin experiments and approximately
200 cells for rifampicin and ciprofloxacin experiments. These initial cell
numbers per population are somewhat higher than the single cell assumed
by the fluctuation test, yet they are low enough to ensure that the probability
that mutations are present at the start of the experiment is small (hence
ensuring statistical independence between resistance emergence events).
These somewhat higher initial cell numbers allow to limit stochastic
population extinction upon starting lineages, and to limit the differences in

                                                                                                               65
the final population density (after a fixed growth period) caused by early
stochastic growth dynamics. The first 96-well plate was used to monitor cell
growth in a plate reader (shaking = 400 RPM, double orbital). This monitor
plate served as a rough indication of when the populations were in mid-
exponential phase, this plate was not directly used to gather any data. The
other two plates were grown under agitation (Grant-Bio PMS 1000i;
ciprofloxacin and rifampicin shaking = 700 RPM; ampicillin shaking = 540
RPM) in identical incubators (INCU-line, IL 56 Premium) at 37 °C and 40 °C
respectively.

When the populations were roughly in mid-exponential phase (determined
using CFP fluorescence) the number of mutants in each population was
assessed by plating the entire population on agar plates containing
antibiotics. These agar plates were incubated for five or six days at 37 °C or
at 40 °C (at the temperature at which the populations were grown in the 96-
well plate). Subsequently, the number of mutants on each agar plate was
counted. The final population densities at the time of plating were
determined in two ways: through CFU-counting and CFP fluorescence
measurements. For CFU counting a 2 µL sample was taken from a subset of
12 of the populations (for one of the AMP experiments a subset of 4
populations was used), this sample was subsequently diluted with a factor of
105 and plated on agar plates without antibiotics, this provided an estimate
of the mean final population densities. For CFP fluorescence all replicate
populations were measured in plate reader (BMG Labtech CLARIOstar,
excitation = 431 ± 15 nm, emission = 472 ± 15nm), and using a calibration
curve the final number of cells for each replicate population could be
estimated. This experiment was repeated three times for each antibiotic in
Groningen (NL).

The R-package FLAN (Mazoyer et al. 2016) was used to analyze the data,
using the "mutestim" function to compute mutation rate estimates and using
the "flan.test" function to perform a fluctuation analysis test to compare the
mutation rate between the two temperatures. Several different estimation
methods and lifetime models implemented in the FLAN package were used.

66
Fluctuation tests ampicillin conducted in Montpellier
For ampicillin, two additional fluctuation test experiments were conducted
in Montpellier (FR). The experiments shown are a subset of pilot experiments
used to create a fine-tuned protocol, hence the protocol for these two
experiments deviates slightly from the one described above for the
experiments conducted in Groningen. Nonetheless, these experiments are
included as they illustrate that the patterns observed for ampicillin replicate
across two different labs.
First of all, populations created from the dilute cell suspension had a culture
volume of 250 µl. To determine the population densities only a subset of 8
populations (instead of 12) were sampled, diluted with a factor 105 and
plated on agar plates without antibiotics. No CFP measurements of final
population density were performed. For the first ampicillin experiment
conducted in Montpellier the experiments for the two temperatures 37 °C
and 40 °C were conducted on two different days, the number of replicate
populations also differed between these two days. For 37 °C, 14 populations
were plated on antibiotic plates. For 40 °C, 30 populations were plated on
antibiotic plates. For the second ampicillin experiment conducted in
Montpellier the experiments for the two temperatures, 37 °C and 40 °C ,
were performed on the same day. For each temperature a total of 52
populations was plated on antibiotic plates to asses the number of mutants
in each population.

                                                                                                               67
Supplemental results

Several additional experiments were conducted to verify that some of
assumptions of the fluctuation test experiments hold. This included
comparing the growth rates at 37 °C and 40 °C and comparing the plating
efficiency at 37 °C and 40 °C. Additionally, a limited set of mutants was fully
sequenced to confirm that the colonies growing on antibiotic containing
plates do indeed represent genetic mutants. Furthermore, the mutation
rates were estimated using CFP fluorescence as a measure of final population
density (instead of CFU counting). In addition, the mutation rates were
estimated using several different estimation methods and lifetime models
implemented in the FLAN package. Finally, an experiment was conducted to
assess temperature-dependent antibiotic efficacy.

Comparing growth rates
A fluctuation test assumes a pure birth process, hence differences in growth
rates between the two treatments can cause discrepancies (i.e., a different
total number of divisions between the treatments). Therefore, the growth
rate of E. coli REL4548-CFP-lux was at measured at 37 °C and 40 °C using CFP
fluorescence. An overnight culture was diluted 106-fold and was used to
create populations in a 96-well plate in a similar way to the fluctuation test.
This plate was subsequently grown until stationary phase in the plate reader.
This was repeated on two separate days: on the first day the 96-well plate
was incubated at 37 °C, and on the second day the 96-well plate was
incubated at 40 °C . To prevent any effect of evaporation on the wells on the
edge of 96-well plate were excluded from the analysis, resulting in 54
replicate populations for each temperature. To compare growth rates
between the two temperatures the linear portion of each population's log
density dynamics (corresponding to exponential growth) was plotted (figure
S1). Visual inspection as well as a statistical test (figure S2) indicated that the
growth rate was not different between 37 °C and 40 °C (p = 0.7881).

68
Figure S1. Linear portion of the log density dynamics (log (CFP)), including the linear models
fit to these dynamics.

                                                                                                               69
Figure S2. Temperature did not significantly affect growth rate. The linear portion of the log
density dynamics was extracted and the slopes compared between temperatures using a t-
test (p = 0.7881). Vertical line shows the median, box shows the interquartile range.

70
Comparing plating efficiency
Differences in plating efficiency between the two different temperatures
could cause discrepancies in estimating final population densities. Therefore,
the plating efficiency of cells plated on standard agar plates (without
antibiotics) was compared between the two temperatures. Specifically, an
overnight culture was grown to stationary phase prior to being diluted 106-
fold. 25 µl of this dilution was then plated on 40 non-selective DM1000 agar
plates. Subsequently, half of the plates were grown at 37 °C and half at 40
°C , resulting in 20 replicates per temperature. Plates were photographed and
counted as for the fluctuation test. The resulting data is shown in figure S3,
a Wilcoxon rank sum test showed no significant difference in plating
efficiency between 37 °C and 40 °C (p = 0.3935).

Figure S3. Comparing the plating efficiency of cells plated on standard agar plates (without
antibiotics) between the two temperatures 37 °C and 40 °C. Vertical line shows the median,
box shows the interquartile range.

                                                                                                               71
Sequencing results
To see if the colonies observed on the agar plates with antibiotics do indeed
have mutations conferring resistance, a small subset of mutants was fully
sequenced (three per temperature per antibiotic, 18 in total) and their
genomes were screened for relevant resistance mutations. Subsequently,
the mutants and the wild-type REL4548-CFP-lux strain were grown in
DM1000 and DNA was extracted using the GenElute Bacterial Genomic DNA
Kit (Merk). The extracted DNA was quantified using a nanodrop and
subsequently shipped to BGI Europe for sequencing, where sequencing was
performed on a DNBseq machine using a read length of 150 bp, sequencing
about 10 million reads per sample. The resulting reads for the starting strain
and the mutants were aligned to the REL606 reference sequence
(NC_012967.1, resulting in approximately 300X coverage) and the mutations
were analysed using Breseq (Detherage & Barrick, 2014). The differences
between the reference and the starting strain were subtracted from those in
the mutants so that only mutations that occurred during the experiment
were observed. The results are summarized in Table S1. Mutations in known
resistance associated genes were identified in 13/18 mutants tested.

72
Table S1. Resistance mutations identified using Breseq in fully sequenced mutants and
references to sources identifying and studying similar mutations.

Anti-   Temper-  Nr Mutation              Position Gene mutated                Citation
biotic   ature

Amp     37       1  AC                    95,266     Peptidoglycan             Li et al. 2019
                                                     glycosyltransferase FtsI
                    L350F (TTATTC)                   (ftsl)

Amp     37       2  GA                    433,084 Endopeptidase La (lon) Nicoloff et al. 2013

                    L714L (CTGCTA)

Amp     37       3 GT                     3,464,981  2component system         Jordan et al. 2022
                    E96D (GAGGAT)         1,003,577  response regulator        Jordan et al. 2022
                                                     OmpR (ompR)
Amp     40       1  +AA coding (498/1089
                                                     porin OmpF (ompF)
                    nt)

Amp     40       2-                            -     -                         -
                                          3,464,288  2component system         Jordan et al. 2022
Amp                 2 bp coding                      sensor histidine kinase   -
        40       3 (264265/1353 nt)            -     EnvZ (envZ)

Cipro   37       1-                                  -

Cipro   37       2-                            -     -                         -
                                          1,003,302                            Vinue et al. 2015;
Cipro   37       3  1 bp coding                      porin OmpF (ompF)         Kishi & Takei 2009;
                                               -                               Forst et al., 1989
                    (773/1089 nt)         1,004,083  -                         -
                                          3,464,348                            Vinue et al. 2015;
Cipro   40       1-                       4,162,444  porin                     Kishi & Takei 2009;
                                          4,162,441  OmpF/asparaginetRN        Forst et al., 1989
Cipro   40       2  9 bp intergenic                  A ligase (ompF/asnS)      Vinue et al. 2015;
                                               -     2component system         Kishi & Takei 2009;
                    (9/+585)              4,162,570  response regulators       Forst et al., 1989
                                          4,162,570  (envZ, ompR)
Cipro   40       3 314 bp                 4,162,387  DNAdirected RNA           Weinstein &
                                                     polymerase subunit        Zaman 2018
                    TC                               beta (rpoB)
                                                     DNAdirected RNA           Weinstein &
Rif     37       1 I530T                             polymerase subunit        Zaman 2018
                                                     beta (rpoB)
                    (ATCACC)                                                   -
                                                     -
Rif     37       2 GT                                                          Weinstein &
                    R529L (CGTCTT)                   DNAdirected RNA           Zaman 2018
                                                     polymerase subunit
Rif     37       3-                                  beta (rpoB)               Weinstein &
                                                     DNAdirected RNA           Zaman 2018
Rif                 TA                               polymerase subunit
        40       1 I572N (ATCAAC)                    beta (rpoB)               Weinstein &
                                                     DNAdirected RNA           Zaman 2018
Rif     40       2 TA                                polymerase subunit
                    I572N (ATCAAC)                   beta (rpoB)

                    TA
Rif     40       3 L511Q (CTGCAG)

                                                                                               73
Estimation of mutation rates using CFP fluorescence
A calibration curve was constructed to translate CFP fluorescence values to
colony forming units (CFU). To construct this calibration curve, a stationary
phase culture was repeatedly diluted two-fold and CFP emissions for each
dilution read using the plate reader (BMG Labtech CLARIOstar, excitation =
431 ± 15 nm, emission = 472 ± 15nm, shaking = 400 RPM, double orbital). To
collect CFU data, a separate dilution was made so that there was a sufficient
volume of bacterial culture for plating. From this diluted culture, six
replicates of each of three concentrations (0.5 x 10-6, 1 x 10-6, and 2 x 10-6) of
200 L each were plated on non-selective DM1000 agar and grown at 37 °C
for approximately 24 hours before counting as above. Since all of these
dilutions gave a countable number of cells, each replicate was converted to
the number of cells in an undiluted population and the mean calculated. This
was then used to calculate the expected number of cells in each of the
dilutions for which CFP emissions had been measured. A linear model was
computed between CFU as estimated above and CFP emissions, giving a
calibration curve (figure S4). Final population densities were also estimated
using CFP fluorescence. The calibration curve is shown in figure S4 was then
used to infer final population densities for the fluctuation test experiments,
using CFP fluorescence measurements. The obtained results are shown in
figure S5, as can be observed they are in agreement with those obtained
when estimating final population density using classical CFU counting.

74
Figure S4. Calibration curve between CFP fluorescence and colony forming units (CFU)
                                                                                                               75
Figure S5. Mutation rates estimated using CFP fluorescence to assess final population density
for each population: (A) ciprofloxacin, (B) rifampicin, and (C) ampicillin. Points show the
estimated mutation rate for a given experiment and temperature, with error bars
corresponding to ± 1 standard error. Lines join the result for 37 °C and 40 °C for a single
experiment; significant differences between mutation rate at 37 °C and 40 °C (p < 0.05) are
shown as solid lines, non-significant differences are shown as dotted lines. All experiments
shown were performed at the University of Groningen, Netherlands. The mutation rates were
estimated using the FLAN package, using the estimation method maximum likelihood, and
using the Luria-Delbrück exponential lifetime model (default settings).

76
Different procedures for estimating mutation rates
Several procedures for inferring mutation rates are implemented in the FLAN
package (17). These include two different estimation methods (maximum
likelihood and generating function) and three different lifetime models
(Luria-Delbrück exponential lifetime model, Haldane constant lifetime model
and Inhomogeneous model). Figure 1 in the main text is based on the default
setting in FLAN (maximum likelihood, Luria-Delbrück model). Figures S6 to
S10 show the results when applying the other combinations of estimation
method and lifetime model to our data. The figures show that our
conclusions are robust to the method chosen: in all cases, the differences
between the mutation rate at 37 °C and 40 °C were in the same direction
and significant for all experiments (p < 0.05).

Figure S6. As Figure 1 in main text , but using the estimation method maximum likelihood,
and using the Haldane constant lifetime model.

                                                                                                               77
Figure S7. As Figure 1 in main text , but using the estimation method maximum likelihood,
and using the inhomogeneous lifetime model.

78
Figure S8. As Figure 1 in main text , but using the estimation method generating function,
and using the Luria-Delbrück exponential lifetime model.

Figure S9. As Figure 1 in main text , but using the estimation method maximum likelihood,
and using the Haldane constant lifetime model.

                                                                                                               79
Figure S10. As Figure 1 in main text, but using the estimation method maximum likelihood,
and using the inhomogeneous lifetime model.

Temperature-dependent antibiotic efficacy

Temperature-dependent changes in the mutation rate observed in the
fluctuation test could be due to changes in the rate at which mutations occur
in the genome (genomic mutation rate) or, alternatively, they could be
caused by differences in the proportion of mutations that convey resistance
at each temperature. The latter effect could be caused by temperature-
dependent efficacy of the antibiotic, implying that mutations that convey
resistance at one temperature are not able to convey resistance at the other
temperature. To explore the temperature-dependent efficacy of each of the
three antibiotics, we conducted a fluctuation test as described above.
However with an important change, that when assessing the number of
resistant mutants in a population (grown in a 96-well plate in liquid culture
at 37 °C or 40 °C ), each population was split in half, and half of the
population was grown on antibiotic-containing plates at 37 °C and the other
half was grown on antibiotic-containing plates at 40 °C. Therefore, for each
liquid culture temperature, there were two different antibiotic agar plate

80
culture incubation temperatures. For each population, the number of
mutants on each of the two antibiotic agar plates should be equal if there is
no temperature dependent efficacy of the antibiotic, and if we ignore the
production of de novo mutations during growth on the agar plates, as is
classically done in fluctuation test data analysis. If on the other hand the
efficacy of the antibiotic is different per temperature, some of the mutants
that are resistant at one temperature should not be resistant at another
temperature, leading to a difference in the observed number of mutants on
the two agar plates originating from the same liquid culture population. Only
those liquid culture populations in which at least one mutant was detected
were included in the analysis, since being able to detect the impact of
antibiotic agar incubation temperature is conditional on the presence of
mutants in the liquid culture populations. For each liquid culture
temperature, the impact of antibiotic agar incubation temperature was
assessed using a Wilcoxon signed-rank test.

For ciprofloxacin (figures S11 and S12) it was found that for both liquid
culture temperatures, the antibiotic agar incubation temperature
significantly impacted the number of mutants detected (for liquid culture
37 °C n = 22 and p = 0.0394 , for liquid culture 40 °C n = 13 and p = 0.0422).
However, as can be seen in figure S12, the sign of this effect was different for
each liquid culture temperature. There is thus no consistent effect of
temperature on the efficacy of ciprofloxacin, instead it seems that a change
in temperature between the liquid culture phase and the growth on
antibiotic agar increases the efficacy of ciprofloxacin. We hypothesize that a
change in temperature causes a mild-stress on the cells, subsequently
ciprofloxacin works more effectively to kill these mildly stressed cells. We
note that such a change in temperature does not occur in our original
fluctuation-test protocol as antibiotic agar plates are incubated at the same
temperature as the liquid culture from which they originate. Therefore, the
effect of a change in temperature on the efficacy of ciprofloxacin should not
impact our mutation rate estimates obtained using the fluctuation test.

For rifampicin the sample size was unexpectedly small (for liquid culture 37
°C n = 2, for liquid culture 40 °C n = 4) and hence no statistical testing could

                                                                                                               81
be conducted, the data is shown in figure S13. For ampicillin (figures S14 and
S15) a consistent effect of antibiotic agar incubation temperature was
detected regardless of liquid culture temperature (for liquid culture 37 °C
n = 17 and p = 0.0003 , for liquid culture 40 °C n = 14 and p = 0.0024). This
clearly indicates that the efficacy of ampicillin is temperature dependent,
and/or that de novo mutations, on the plates, contribute to the outcome,
and they are produced at different rates in different temperatures.

Figure S11. The number of ciprofloxacin resistant mutants detected in each population at
each antibiotic agar incubation temperature, lines connect samples originating from the same
liquid culture. The left panels shows populations grown in liquid culture at 37 °C. The right
panel shows populations grown in liquid culture at 40 °C.

82
Figure S12. Boxplot showing the number of ciprofloxacin resistant mutants detected
depending on the antibiotic agar incubation temperature. This plot shows the data
populations grown in liquid culture at 37 °C (left) and at 40 °C (right).

                                                                                                               83
Figure S13. The number of rifampicin resistant mutants detected in each population at each
antibiotic agar incubation temperature, lines connect samples originating from the same
liquid culture. The left panels shows populations grown in liquid culture at 37 °C. The right
panel shows populations grown in liquid culture at 40 °C.

84
Figure S14. The number of ampicillin resistant mutants detected in each population at each
antibiotic agar incubation temperature, lines connect samples originating from the same
liquid culture. The left panels shows populations grown in liquid culture at 37 °C. The right
panel shows populations grown in liquid culture at 40 °C.

                                                                                                               85
Figure S15. Boxplot showing the number of ampicillin resistant mutants detected depending
on the antibiotic agar incubation temperature. Shown for populations grown in liquid culture
at 37 °C (left) and at 40 °C (right).

86
References

Deatherage, D.E., Barrick, J.E. (2014). Identification of mutations in
laboratory-evolved microbes from next-generation sequencing data
using breseq. Methods in Molecular Biology, 1151, 165­188.
Elena, S. F., Ekunwe, L., Hajela, N., Oden, S. A., & Lenski, R. E. (1998).
Distribution of fitness effects caused by random insertion mutations in
Escherichia coli. Genetica, 102, 349-358.
Forst S., Delgado J., Inouye M. (1989) Phosphorylation of OmpR by the
osmosensor EnvZ modulates expression of the ompF and ompC genes in
Escherichia coli. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences U S A.
86(16), 6052-6056.
Gallet, R., Cooper, T. F., Elena, S. F., & Lenormand, T. (2012). Measuring
selection coefficients below 10- 3: method, questions, and prospects.
Genetics, 190(1), 175-186.
Howe, K., Karsi, A., Germon, P., Wills, R. W., Lawrence, M. L., & Bailey, R. H.
(2010). Development of stable reporter system cloning luxCDABE genes into
chromosome of Salmonella enterica serotypes using Tn7 transposon. BMC
microbiology, 10(1), 1-8.
Jordan J.A., Lenski R.E., Card K.J. (2022) Idiosyncratic Fitness Costs of
Ampicillin-Resistant Mutants Derived from a Long-Term Experiment
with Escherichia coli. Antibiotics 11(3), 347.
Kishii R. & Takei M. (2009) Relationship between the expression of ompF
and quinolone resistance in Escherichia coli. Journal of Infection and
Chemotherapy. 2009 15(6):361-6.
Lenski, R. E., Rose, M. R., Simpson, S. C., & Tadler, S. C. (1991). Long-term
experimental evolution in Escherichia coli. I. Adaptation and divergence
during 2,000 generations. The American Naturalist, 138(6), 1315-1341.

                                                                                                               87
Lenski, R. E., & Travisano, M. (1994). Dynamics of adaptation and
diversification: a 10,000-generation experiment with bacterial
populations. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 91(15),
6808-6814.
Li M., Liu Q., Teng Y., Ou L., Xi .Y, Chen S., Duan G. (2019) The resistance
mechanism of Escherichia coli induced by ampicillin in laboratory. Infection
and Drug Resistance, 12, 2853-2863.
Nicoloff H., & Andersson DI. Lon protease inactivation, or translocation of
the lon gene, potentiate bacterial evolution to antibiotic resistance.
Molecular Microbiology, 90(6):1233-48.
Mazoyer, A., Drouilhet, R., Despréaux, S., & Ycart, B. (2016). flan: An R
package for inference on mutation models. The R Journal, 2017, 9 (1), 334-
351.
Vinué L., Corcoran MA., Hooper D.C., Jacoby G.A. (2015) Mutations that
enhance the ciprofloxacin resistance of Escherichia coli with qnrA1.
Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy 60(3), 1537-45.
Weinstein Z.B. & Zaman M.H. (2018) Evolution of rifampin resistance in
Escherichia coli and Mycobacterium smegmatis due to substandard drugs.
Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy 63(1), e01243-18.

88
           Chapter 4

              _______________________________________

   The evolution of condition-
  dependent mutation rates in

     changing environments

 Timo J.B. van Eldijk*, Jana M. Riederer*, G. Sander van
                  Doorn & Franz J. Weissing

*These authors contributed equally to the manuscript (shared first authorship)
                                       In preparation
                                                                                                           89
Abstract

Empirical studies have demonstrated that mutation rates can be affected
by the condition of an individual or its environment. It has been proposed
that condition-dependent mutation rates could be selectively favoured as
in times of maladaptation the production of many new mutants might
enhance the ability of a population to undergo adaptive evolution (i.e. they
enhance evolvability). However, models studying the evolution of
condition-dependent mutation rates are lacking. Here we used an
individual-based simulation approach to examine the evolution of
condition-dependent mutation rates in a changing environment. All
simulations converged to one of two alternative outcomes: a condition-
dependent mutation rate (which is low when the phenotype matches the
environment and high otherwise) or a constant mutation rate at an
intermediate level. Populations where a condition-dependent mutation
rate evolved were substantially better adapted to their (changing)
environment. The likelihood of the two evolutionary outcomes depended
on the frequency of environmental change, the initial mutation rates at the
start of a simulation, and the model assumptions on the mutation rate of
the mutator loci. When this mutation rate was self-referent (i.e.,
determined by the mutator loci themselves), condition-dependent
mutation rates evolved much more readily than when the mutation rate of
mutator loci was externally given. We conclude that condition-dependent
mutation rates can indeed evolve and that populations with condition-
dependent mutation rates have an enhanced evolvability, that is, an
enhanced ability to adapt to changing conditions.

Introduction

The study of mutational processes is crucial to understanding evolution, as
mutation provides the variation upon which selection acts. Since mutation
rates affect what genetic variation is available, they shape the ability of
biological systems to undergo adaptive evolution. In other words, mutation
rates are key determinants of evolvability (Badeau & Packard, 2003; Jones et
al., 2007; Riederer et al., 2022).

90
The rate of mutation is subject to evolution. This is illustrated by the spread
of mutator strains in the Lenski long-term evolution experiment, leading to
bacterial strains with an elevated mutation rate (Sniegowski et al., 1999).
Many researchers have studied the evolution of mutation rates both in
models (Sniegowski et al., 2000; Badeau & Packard, 2003; Andre & Godelle,
2006; Desai et al., 2007; Lynch et al., 2016) and empirically, for example by
using evolution experiments (Sniegowski et al., 1999; Colgrave & Collins,
2008; Couce et al., 2017; Sprouffske et al., 2018). In general, the optimal
mutation rate strongly depends on the degree of adaptation. When a
population is well adapted, a low mutation rate is advantageous, as most
mutations are deleterious. However, when a population is maladapted, an
increased mutation rate can be beneficial, as it leads to the more rapid
production of better-adapted variants. Alleles leading to an increased
mutation rate can "hitchhike" along with any beneficial variants they
produce. This is especially effective in asexual populations where the linkage
between mutator alleles and the adaptive mutations they produce can be
more easily maintained.

An organism's condition can influence its mutation rate. An example of this
is stress-induced mutagenesis: various stressors are known to result in
increased mutation rates. There is widespread empirical evidence for such
stress-induced mutagenesis in many bacterial species, such as Escherichia
coli, Bacillus subtilis and Staphylococcus aureus (Cirz et al., 2007; Foster,
2007; Debora et al. 2010; Ram & Hadany, 2012; Ha & Edwards, 2021). A
stress-related elevation of the mutation rate has also been demonstrated in
sexually reproducing eukaryotes, such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae and
Drosophila melanogaster (Heidenreich, 2007; Agrawal & Wang, 2008).
Stress-induced mutagenesis has even been demonstrated in human cancer
cells (Cipponi et al., 2020).

Stress-induced mutagenesis may be a non-adaptive side effect of stressful
conditions (Ram & Hadany 2012). For instance, a stressor or stress response
could impact DNA or the enzymes responsible for maintaining and replicating
DNA, thereby leading to an increase in mutation rates, a phenomenon more
accurately described as stress-associated mutagenesis (Bjedov et al., 2003;
Tenallion et al., 2004; Mac Lean et al., 2013). There are, however, at least

                                                                                                               91
two adaptive explanations for stress-induced mutagenesis. First, when an
organism is stressed, the costs of maintaining replicative fidelity could
outweigh the benefits, inducing selection to switch off fidelity-enhancing
mechanisms under stressful conditions (Ram & Hadany 2012). Second, stress
may be an indicator that the organism is not well-adapted to its local
conditions. As mentioned above, elevating the mutation rate may facilitate
adaptation under such circumstances (Sniegowski et al., 1999; 2000).

We are here mainly interested in the second explanation, which is based on
the idea that selection should shape mutation rates in such a way that they
keep pace with the level of adaptation: in times of low stress (= a high level
of adaptation), the mutation rate should be low, whereas in times of high
stress (= a low level of adaptation), the mutation rate should be elevated.
According to this logic, the mutation rate should be condition-dependent: it
should be low under favourable conditions and high under unfavourable
conditions. Here, `condition' could either refer to the state of the
environment or to the state of the organism, which by mechanisms like the
stress-response system may indicate a lack of adaptation.

Whilst the empirical evidence for condition-dependent mutation rates is
abundant, the condition-dependence of mutation rates is much less studied
from a theoretical point of view. The earliest models focused exclusively on
the effect of deleterious mutations under condition-dependent mutation
rates (Agrawal 2002; Baer 2008; Shaw & Baer 2011). In contrast, Ram &
Hadany (2012, 2014, 2019) and Ram et al. (2018) also considered beneficial
mutations and showed that stress-induced mutagenesis might be favoured
by selection under a wide array of circumstances. However, the models by
Ram & Hadany (2012, 2014, 2019) considered the loci determining the
relationship between an individual's condition and its mutation rate to be
fixed and not evolvable. In other words, they did not explicitly model the
evolutionary emergence of the relationship between an individual's
condition and its mutation rate.

Here we use an individual-based simulation approach to better understand
the evolution of condition-dependent mutation rates. We model individuals
with a phenotype constantly adapting to a changing environment. We

92
explicitly consider both beneficial and deleterious mutations. Furthermore,
contrary to the previous models by Ram & Hadany (2012, 2014, 2019), we
aim to explicitly model the evolutionary dynamics of the relationship
between an individual condition and the mutation rate. We thus model this
relationship in a flexible manner: In our model, the current mutation rate is
determined by two mutation rate loci and a third locus that controls the
degree of mismatch between the phenotype and the environment at which
individuals switch between the two mutation rates. We allow these loci to
dynamically evolve during our simulations.

We address two research questions. First, can condition-dependent
mutation rates evolve from scratch and what circumstances are favourable
for their evolution? In particular, how is the evolution of condition-
dependent mutation rates related to the degree of environmental change?
Second, how do condition-dependent mutation rates affect the speed of
adaptation in a changing environment? To what extent does a condition-
dependent mutation rate enhance the evolvability of a population?

Most previous models of the evolution of mutation rates assume (often
implicitly) that the mutator loci (i.e., the loci controlling the mutation rate)
mutate according to an externally given fixed mutation rate (e.g., Agrawal
2002, Baer 2008; Shaw & Baer 2011; Ram et al., 2018; Ram & Hadany 2012,
2014, 2019). Here, we also consider the option that the mutation rate at the
mutator loci is "self-referent" in the sense that this mutation rate is affected
by the mutator loci themselves. This assumption is not unrealistic. Consider,
for example, the mechanisms of stress-induced mutagenesis in bacteria,
where error-prone polymerases are expressed when a certain level of stress
is reached (Maslowska et al., 2019). The expression of error-prone
polymerases should increase all mutation rates, including those at the
mutator loci. We, therefore, investigate whether and how the evolution of a
condition-dependent mutation rate is affected by the model assumptions on
the mutation rate at the mutator loci (externally given versus self-referent).

                                                                                                               93
Methods

Model overview

We use an individual-based simulation approach to study the evolution of a
population in an environment that may randomly change from one
generation to the next. Each individual has a genetically determined
phenotype P. The expected number of offspring of an individual is negatively
related to the mismatch between the individual's phenotype P and the
current state of the environment E. Figure 1A illustrates the change in the
environment and the tracking of the environment by the average phenotype
in the population due to the joint action of selection, mutation, and genetic
drift.

The mutation rate is determined genetically. We consider two scenarios: a
constitutive mutation rate and a condition-dependent mutation rate. In the
first scenario, the mutation rate is determined by the allele on a mutator
locus; this allele is also inherited from parent to offspring, subject to
mutation. In the second scenario, the mutation rate is dependent on the
condition of the individual harbouring this mutation, where the individual's
`condition' is determined by the mismatch of the individual's phenotype P
and the current state of the environment E. As illustrated in Figure 1B,
condition-dependent mutation rates are encoded by three loci: a threshold
locus and two mutator loci. The allele at the threshold locus determines the
degree of mismatch between P and E for which the individual `feels' to be in
a `good' condition (small mismatch) or in a `bad' condition (large mismatch).
The allele on mutator locus A determines the mutation rate when in good
condition, while mutator locus B determines the mutation rate in bad
condition. Again, the alleles at all three loci are transmitted from parent to
offspring, subject to mutation.

In both scenarios, the alleles at the mutation-relevant loci are also affected
by mutation. We consider two variants for the mutation rate at these loci: (a)
a constant, externally given (and hence not evolving) mutation rate; or (b) a
`self-referent' mutation rate, which is identical to the mutation rate at the

94
locus determining the phenotype P (and hence determined by the mutation-
relevant loci themselves).

Figure 1. Illustration of the model assumptions. (A) We consider a randomly changing
environment E (purple line segments) that keeps constant for some generations but switches
to a new state with a fixed probability. Natural selection tends to reduce the mismatch
between the genetically determined phenotype of individuals and the current environment.
As a result, the mean phenotype  tends to track the environment. (B) Our model allows
mutation rates to be condition dependent. In this case, the mutation rate of an individual is
governed by three heritable traits (, , ): the mutation rate is  if the mismatch
between the individual's phenotype P and the current environment E (the individual`s degree
of maladaptation) is smaller than the threshold T, and it is  otherwise.

Model assumptions
Environmental change: The environment takes on values between 0 and 1.
The environmental state E remains constant throughout a generation and is
the same for all members of the population. From one generation to the
next, the environmental state changes with a probability . Hence the
expected duration of environmental stasis is  = 1. Whenever an
environmental change occurs, a new environmental state is drawn at
random from the uniform distribution on the interval [0,1]. Unless stated
otherwise,  = 0.01 or equivalently  = 100.
Phenotypes, mismatch, and fitness: Each individual has a genetically
determined (see below) phenotype P, which is a number between 0 and 1.

                                                                                                               95
The expected reproductive success (`fitness') (, ) of individuals with
phenotype P in an environment in state E is negatively related to the
mismatch | - | and proportional to the Gaussian

                     (, ) = ( -   ( - )2),

where the parameter s measures the strength of selection. For all simulations
reported in the main text, we chose  = 10, corresponding to a standard
deviation of 0.05 = 0.224 of the Gaussian.

Selection and reproduction: We consider a population with discrete, non-
overlapping generations and a fixed population size of N individuals. In all
simulations reported, we chose = 1,000. Inheritance is asexual; hence,
offspring inherit the phenotype of their parents unless a mutation occurs. A
new generation is produced as follows: for each of the N positions, a parent
is drawn from the previous generation by means of a weighted lottery (with
replacement), where the probability of an individual i with phenotype  to
be chosen is proportional to the individual's fitness (, ). This procedure
ensures that the expected number of offspring of each individual is
proportional to (, ).

Inheritance: Individuals are haploid and have either two or four gene loci,

each of which harbouring infinitely many alleles (corresponding to real

numbers). All parental alleles are transmitted from parent to offspring,

subject to mutation. One locus encodes the phenotype P of an individual,

while the other loci determine the mutation rate at the P locus. The alleles

at the P locus are elements of the unit interval [0,1]; each allele directly

corresponds to the phenotype it encodes. In the case of an unconditional

mutation rate, the second locus encodes the mutation rate M at the P locus.

To be more specific, the alleles at the M locus are real numbers L that encode

the  logit  of  the  mutation  rate:    =  (         and  therefore    =  (1+1(-)).
                                              (1-))

Encoding mutation rates by their logit has the convenient property that a

given reduction in the logit has a smaller and smaller effect on the mutation

rate the closer the mutation rate is to zero. In the case of a condition-

dependent mutation rate, the mutation rate at the P locus is determined by

96
three parameters (, , ), as indicated in Fig. 1B. The mutation rates 
and threshold locus T are encoded by their logit.

Mutation at the P locus: Whenever a new offspring is produced, it inherits
the parental alleles, unless a mutation occurs. At the P locus, a mutation
occurs with a probability that is determined by the mutation-related loci. If a
mutation occurs, the new allelic value is given by  =  + , where
the mutational step size  is drawn from a normal distribution with mean
zero and standard deviation 0.05. As P is limited to the unit interval, a
negative value of  is set to zero, while a value of  exceeding 1 is set
to 1.

Mutation at the mutator loci: The alleles encoding the mutation rate are also
inherited with mutation. In the model variant with externally given mutation
rates, each of the loci encoding the mutation rate mutates with a constant
probability  = 0.001. In the model variant with self-referent mutation
rates, the mutation rate at the mutation-rate determining loci is the same as
the mutation rate at the P locus (which in turn is determined by the alleles at
the mutation-rate determining loci). If a mutation occurs at a locus
determining a mutation rate (M,  or ), the new logit value (L,  or )
is given by  =  + , where the mutational step size  is drawn
from a normal distribution with mean zero and standard deviation 0.5. For
the mutation rate, this implies that

  =          . 

     +(1-)-

Mutations at the threshold locus T are modelled similarly to mutations at the
M loci.

Initialisation: All simulations start with a monomorphic population, with all
individuals having allele  = 0.5 at the locus determining the phenotype.
Unless stated otherwise, all mutation rates are initialised at the value 0.001
and the threshold locus is initialised at  = 0.5. We will later study the effect
of other initialisations on the evolutionary outcome.

Simulation details: All simulations were run for 100,000 generations. For
each initialisation and parameter setting, 100 replicate simulations were run.

                 97
The simulation programme was written in C++, and the simulation data were
processed and analysed in R.

Results

Evolution of a constitutive mutation rate
Figure 2 shows what constitutive mutation rate evolved in 100 replicate
simulations for different average times of environmental stasis  = 1, or,
equivalently, for different rates  of environmental change. In a rapidly
changing environment ( = 0.1;  = 10), the highest possible mutation
rate  = 1.0tends to evolve, while the evolved mutation rate approaches
zero in a slowly changing or constant environment (  0.001;   1000).
The increase of the mutation rate with the rate of environmental change is
not unexpected, as a high mutation rate allows evolution to keep pace with
fast environmental change. To verify that a higher mutation rate does indeed
lead to better adaptive tracking of a rapidly changing environment, we
investigated the average mismatch between phenotype and environment for
a range of fixed (i.e., non-evolving) constitutive mutation rates. For the case
 = 100, the results are shown in Figure 3. The mismatch between
phenotype and environment is highest for very low and very high mutation
rates and minimal for a constitutive mutation rate of about 0.1. This is in
agreement with Figure 2, where the evolved constitutive mutation rates
were also close to 0.1 for  = 100.

98
Figure 2. Effect of the average time of environmental stasis on the evolution of a constitutive
mutation rate. For six values of  = 1, a violin plot summarizes the results of 100 replicate
simulations, with the solid lines indicating the median and the boxes indicating the
interquartile range. Each point corresponds to the average mutation rate that had evolved at
the end of a simulation.

                                                                                                               99
Figure 3. Effect of a non-evolving constitutive mutation rate on the average mismatch
between phenotype and environment. For 12 values of a fixed, non-evolving constitutive
mutation rate and in an environment that changes on average once every 100 generations
( = 100), each violin plot summarizes the results of 100 replicate simulations. Each point
corresponds to the time-averaged mismatch between phenotype and environment,
calculated over the last 25,000 generations, of a simulation.

100
Evolution of condition-dependent mutation rates

Figure 4 shows the outcome of 100 replicate simulations that allowed for the
evolution of condition-dependent mutation rates. All simulations were
initialised with mutation rates  =  = 0.001 and a threshold value  =
0.5. In the course of evolution, two distinct mutation rate strategies
emerged, that differ in the value of the threshold, which either converged to
zero or to one (Fig. 4C). The first strategy, which is illustrated in Fig. 4D, is
characterized by a low value of the threshold T, a low value of mutation rate
, and a high value of mutation rate . Individuals with this strategy
express a low mutation rate () when adapted almost perfectly (when the
mismatch | - | is smaller than the threshold and, hence, close to zero),
but switch to a high mutation rate () as soon as the mismatch is larger
than the threshold. This is thus a condition-dependent mutation rate
strategy. The second strategy, which is illustrated in Fig. 4E, is characterized
by high values of the threshold and intermediate values for mutation rate
. In this case, the intermediate mutation rate  is expressed under
almost all conditions, since the mismatch | - | is only in extreme cases
larger than the threshold (which is close to one). Hence, the mutation rate
 is almost never used. In other words, this second strategy is not really
condition dependent and effectively corresponds to the constitutive
mutation rate strategy . In line with this, the evolved value of  is similar
to the mutation rates that evolved in the constitutive mutation rate model
for the same value of the parameter D (see Figure 2,  = 100). The two
strategies form distinct clusters: this can be seen in Figure 4AB, when values
of  and  are colour-coded according to the corresponding threshold
value.

In the Supplement, we show corresponding simulations, but for weaker
selection (i.e., lower values of s). Now, the evolution of the mutation rate
proceeds more slowly and in a more stochastic fashion. However, both the
condition-dependent strategy and the constant mutation strategy still
evolve, as shown in Figure S1.

                                                                                                             101
Figure 4. Evolution of condition-dependent mutation rates. Evolution of (A) the mutation
rate , (B) the mutation rate , and (C) the threshold T in 100 replicate simulations of the
condition-dependent mutation rate model that were all initialised at  =  = 0.001 and
 = 0.5. Points show the average population value at a particular timepoint for a particular
replicate. The threshold either converges to zero or to one. The mutation rates in (A) and (B)
are colour-coded in such a way that the rates evolving for low threshold values appear black,
while rates evolving for high threshold values appear blue. The distinct clusters in (A) to (C)
indicate that there are two distinct evolutionary outcomes (which are plotted as in Fig. 1B):
(D) a condition-dependent mutation-rate strategy with a low threshold T; here, the low
mutation rate  (magenta) is expressed when the mismatch between phenotype and
environment (the degree of maladaptation) is very low, while the high mutation rate 
(cyan) is expressed otherwise; (E) a mutation-rate strategy with a high threshold T; this is
effectively a constitutive mutation-rate strategy, where an intermediate mutation rate 
(magenta) is expressed under almost all conditions, as mismatches | - | close to one occur
very rarely. In (D) and (E), each simulation is represented by the average value of , , and
T; (D) shows all those simulations resulting in  < 0.5, while (E) shows the simulations for
which  > 0.5. (F) shows all 100 replicate simulations. Average duration of environmental
stasis  = 100.

102
Effect of environmental change rate on condition-dependent mutation
rates
Figure 4 considered the default setting  = 100, where the environment
remains constant for, on average, 100 generations. Figure 5 shows the
outcome of 100 replicate simulations for six different values of D. When the
average time of environmental stasis is below 1,000, both the condition-
dependent strategy and the constant mutation strategy consistently emerge.
This is particularly evident in the strongly bimodal distribution of mutation
rate  and the threshold T (Figure 5BC). When the environment remains
constant or changes very rarely (every 10,000 generations), mutation rate
 evolves to very low values, while the evolution of  and T does not show
a clear pattern. If environmental change is very rare, there is no selection for
a high mutation rate (see Figure 2). In this scenario, the mismatch between
phenotype and environment will typically be very small, so that selection on
 and T is very weak. Accordingly, most of the mutation strategy is never
expressed and  and T will largely evolve by genetic drift.

Figure 5. Effect of the average time of environmental stasis on the evolution of condition-
dependent mutation rates. For six values of  = 1, three violin plots show (A) the evolved
mutation rate , (B) the evolved mutation rate , and (C) the evolved threshold T in 100
replicate simulations of the condition-dependent mutation rate model that were all initialised
at  =  = 0.001 and  = 0.5. Each point corresponds to the average value at the end of
one replicate simulation. The solid lines indicate the median.

                                                                                                             103
Initialization effects the evolution of condition-dependent mutation rates

Whenever evolution can have different outcomes, the likelihood of each
outcome typically depends on the initial conditions. Figure 6 shows that this
general principle also applies to the evolution of condition-dependent
mutation rates. The colour of the small squares corresponds to the average
threshold value that evolved in 900 simulations: almost all of these values
were either close to zero (blue) or close to one (yellow). As explained above,
the evolved value of T indicates the evolved mutation-rate strategy: low
threshold values are associated with a condition-dependent mutation-rate
strategy, while high threshold values are associated with a constitutive
mutation-rate strategy. Most of the simulations result in a condition-
dependent mutation rate if the threshold is initialised at a low value ( =
0.1) or if the mutation rates  and  are initialised in such a way that
 < .

The emergence of the two alternative mutation-rate strategies can
intuitively be understood as follows. At the start of a simulation, any change
in the environment selects for an increase the mutation rate, as the initialised
mutation rates are relatively low. If mutation rate  is initially higher than
mutation rate , the effective mutation rate can be rapidly increased by
increasing the threshold value: with a higher threshold, the relatively high
mutation rate  is expressed more often. When the threshold approaches
one, the resulting mutation-rate strategy is effectively non-condition-
dependent. In this case, mutation rate  is (almost) never expressed and
hence selection cannot effectively operate on it. Mutation rate  evolves
to higher values, in a fashion similar to the constitutive mutation rate model.
.If, in contrast, mutation rate  is initially lower than mutation rate , a
similar effect operates in the opposite direction. Now, there is initial
selection to lower the threshold value, as this increases the effective
mutation rate. In this case, a condition-dependent mutation-rate strategy
evolves where the threshold evolves to a low value, mutation rate 
evolves to a low value and mutation rate  evolves to a very high value.

104
Figure 6. Effect of initial conditions on the evolution of condition-dependent mutation rates.
100 replicate simulations (small coloured squares lined in white) were run for each of nine
parameter combinations (larger squares lined in black), which correspond to different sets of
initial conditions for the parameters , , and T of the condition-dependent mutation rate
model. In the horizontal direction, the threshold T was initialised at the values 0.1, 0.5, and
0.9, respectively. In the vertical direction, the mutation rate  was initialised at the values
0.001, 0.01, and 0.1, while  was initialised at 0.01 in all cases. Each simulation is represented
by a small square that is coloured according to the average value of the threshold T that
evolved in that simulation. Squares coloured yellow represent simulations that evolved a
threshold value close to 1, indicating a constitutive mutation-rate strategy. Squares coloured
blue represent simulations that evolved a threshold value close to zero, indicating a condition-
dependent mutation-rate strategy. A condition-dependent mutation rate evolved in most
simulations that were initialised with a low threshold ( = 0.1) and where at the same time
the initial values of  and  satisfied   . In contrast, a constitutive mutation rate
evolved in most simulations that were initialised at a higher threshold (  0.5), while the
mutation rates were initialised with  > . Average duration of environmental stasis  =
100.

                                                                                                             105
Self-referent mutation rates
Until now we assumed that the three loci determining the mutation rate
mutated with a fixed mutation probability ( = 0.001). Now, we consider a
self-referent mutation rate: the loci encoding the mutation rate mutate with
the same probability as the P locus (whose mutation rate is encoded by these
loci). A self-referent mutation rate can create an evolutionary runaway
effect: the higher the mutation rate, the faster it can change. The accelerated
evolutionary dynamics becomes apparent when comparing Figure 7 (self-
referent mutation rate) with the corresponding Figure 4ABC (fixed mutation
rate at the mutator loci). A self-referent mutation rate also alters the
likelihood of the two mutation-rate strategies. As shown in Figure 8, a self-
referent mutation rate results much more often in a condition-dependent
mutation-rate strategy than a fixed mutation rate at the mutator loci (Figure
6).
In Supplementary Figure S2, we examine the impact of a self-referent
mutation rate on the evolution of a constitutive mutation rate. Again, we find
an acceleration of the evolutionary dynamics, as observed in the condition-
dependent model.

106
Figure 7. Evolution of condition-dependent mutation rates when the mutation rate at the
mutator loci is self-referent. Evolution of (A) the mutation rate , (B) the mutation rate ,
and (C) the threshold T in 100 replicate simulations of the condition-dependent mutation rate
model that were all initialised at  =  = 0.001 and  = 0.5. Points show the average
population value at a particular timepoint for a particular replicate. The threshold either
converges to zero or to one. The mutation rates in (A) and (B) are colour-coded in such a way
that the rates evolving for low threshold values appear black, while rates evolving for high
threshold values appear blue. Average duration of environmental stasis  = 100.

                                                                                                             107
Figure 8. Effect of initial conditions on the evolution of condition-dependent mutation rates
when the mutation rate at the mutator loci is self-referent. The figure corresponds in all
aspects to Figure 6, but now the mutation rates are self-referent. Now, the likelihood of
evolution of the condition-dependent mutation-rate strategy (simulations corresponding to
blue squares) is conspicuously higher than in the case of a fixed mutation rate at the mutator
loci.

108
Implications for population fitness
The different mutation strategies influence adaptive tracking of the changing
environment. Figure 9 shows how the time-averaged mismatch between
phenotype and environment depends on the model version and the evolved
mutation-rate strategy. s: the constitutively expressed self-referent mutation
rate, the constitutively expressed non-self-referent mutation rate, the
condition-dependent self-referent mutation rate (split based on whether a
condition-dependent mutation strategy evolved in a given replicate
simulation or not, i.e. based on whether the average threshold value was
below or above 0.5), the condition-dependent non-self-referent mutation
rate (split in the same way). A condition-dependent mutation rate strategy
leads to better adaptive tracking of the environment: the simulations in
which a condition-dependent mutation strategy evolved show a clearly
decreased average mismatch between ecological trait and environment.

                                                                                                             109
Figure 9. Time-averaged mismatch between phenotype and environment for different
evolved mutation-rate strategies. Each point corresponds to the time-averaged mismatch
between phenotype P and environmental state E in the final 25,000 generations of a single
simulation. For four model variants, the violin plots summarize the outcome of 100 replicate
simulations. The two left-most violin plots show the results for the constitutive mutation rate
model, either with a non-self-referent mutation rate (yellow) or a self-referent mutation rate
(orange). The middle pair of violin plots and the right-most pair of plots each represent 100
simulations for the condition-dependent mutation rate model, either with non-self-referent
(middle pair) or with self-referent (right-most pair) mutation rate. In the latter two model
variants, the simulation outcomes are split according to whether a condition-dependent
mutation-rate strategy evolved (as indicated by a small evolved threshold  < 0.5: cyan or
light-green plots) or whether a constitutive strategy evolved (as indicated by a large evolved
threshold  > 0.5: dark-blue or dark -green plots). This figure reveals that a condition-
dependent mutation-rate strategy leads to better adaptive tracking of the changing
environment than a constitutive mutation rate. Average duration of environmental stasis  =
100.

110
Discussion

This study provides four main findings. Firstly, we show that elevated mutation rates
evolve under fast environmental change, which facilitate better tracking of the
environment. Secondly, when we allow for a condition-dependent mutation rate to
evolve, two different outcomes emerge: switching between a high and low mutation
rate depending on individual condition, or constitutively expressing only one
mutation rate. Thirdly, condition-dependent mutation rates allow for better
adaptation in changing environments. Fourthly, it matters a lot whether mutation
rates are self-referent or not, i.e. whether mutator alleles affect their own mutation
rate. Self-referent mutation rates speed up the dynamics of mutation rate evolution
and increase the likelihood that a condition-dependent mutation rate will evolve.

Constitutive mutation rates

As a standard of comparison, we first studied the evolution of a constitutive
mutation rate. in relation to the frequency of environmental change. The simulations
revealed that, for a given rate of environmental change, the time-averaged
mismatch between phenotype and environment is minimised at a particular,
intermediate mutation rate. In the simulations, the mutation rate tended to evolve
towards this `optimal' value. Moreover, higher mutation rates evolved in more
rapidly changing environments. This finding is in agreement with earlier models of
mutation rate evolution (Sniegowski et al., 2000; Badeau & Packard, 2003; Andre &
Godelle, 2006; Desai et al., 2007; Lynch et al., 2016). The evolution of elevated
mutation rates in this model is also consistent with experimental evidence showing
that elevated mutation rates can even evolve in response to a single environmental
change (Sniegowski et al., 1997). Our results here are also consistent with the
experimental results obtained by Sprouffske et al. (2018) who experimentally
showed that only a modestly elevated mutation rate conveys adaptive benefits,
whilst highly elevated mutation rates do not. This echoes the observation of an
`optimal' mutation rate in our model.

Condition-dependent mutation rates

When we allowed for the evolution of a condition-dependent mutation rate, we
found that replicate simulations could result in two different outcomes: a mutation
rate that is indeed strongly dependent on the condition of an individual (i.e., the
mismatch between phenotype and environment), or a mutation rate that is
essentially independent of an individual's condition and, hence, constitutive. The
condition-dependent mutation-rate strategy shows a low mutation rate when the

                                                                                                             111
individual is well adapted to the current environmental conditions and a very high
mutation rate when there is the slightest mismatch between phenotype and
environment. The emergence of this condition-dependent strategy is in agreement
with general results on mutation rate evolution, which show that elevated mutation
rates can be advantageous during times of maladaptation, as they allow for the
increased production of potentially beneficial variants (Sniegowski et al., 2000;
Andre & Godelle, 2006; Sprouffske et al., 2018). Simulations in which condition-
dependent mutation rates evolved also show closer tracking of the environment.
Why then do some replicates evolve a non-condition-dependent mutation-rate
strategy, which is associated with a worse performance?

To address this question, we examined under which initialisation conditions each
strategy evolves. The likelihood of the two mutation strategies is strongly dependent
on the initial values of the mutation rates. During the early stages of the simulation,
the fluctuating environment creates a strong selective pressure to increase the
effective mutation rate, in order to keep up with the changing environment. One
way the effective mutation rate can quickly be increased is by modifying the
threshold locus to predominantly express the highest of the two mutation rate loci.
If the highest value mutation rate locus is the mutation rate expressed under low
mismatch (mutation rate A) then the threshold locus will evolve towards a high
value, leading to the continuous expression of only a single mutation rate.
Subsequently drift will act on the non-expressed mutation rate locus, subsequently,
it becomes costly to decrease the threshold again, as it risks expressing the now
maladapted mutation rate locus. Overall, this has thus effectively trapped the
population into a regime in which only a single mutation rate locus is adapted and
used: condition dependence is lost. This explains why some replicates evolve a non-
condition-dependent mutation strategy despite this strategy being associated with
worse performance.

Self-referent mutation rates

Most models on the evolution of condition-dependent mutation rates
implicitly assume that alleles at the mutator loci mutate according to a fixed,
externally given rate (Agrawal 2002, Baer 2008; Shaw & Baer 2011; Ram et
al., 2018; Ram & Hadany 2012, 2014, 2019). Contrary to most previous
models, we also considered the possibility that the effects of the mutator loci
are `self-referent', that is, that the mutator loci affect their own mutation
rate. Such self-reference had a considerable impact on mutation rate

112
evolution. A mutation rate locus with a higher value can change more rapidly;
this can create a runaway effect that speeds up the dynamics of mutation
rate evolution. With a self-referent mutation rate, almost all simulations
evolved a condition-dependent mutation-rate strategy, with the lower-
performing non-condition-dependent mutation-rate strategy only evolving
in a few replicates. Overall, we found that the evolutionary dynamics of self-
referent and non-self-referent mutation rates are strikingly different: when
studying the evolution of mutation rates and in particular when studying the
evolution of condition-dependent mutation rates, it is thus important to
consider if the mutation rate is self-referent or not.

The exploration of self-referent mutation rates is grounded in biology:
mutation rates have been shown to vary strongly across the genome
(Hodgkinson & Eyre-Walker, 2011; Monroe et al., 2022) ­ so genes that affect
the mutation rate in one particular part of the genome without affecting the
mutation rate of their own genetic basis likely exist (not self-referent).
However, some mechanisms enhancing the mutation rate, such as error-
prone polymerases (Maslowska et al., 2019), will likely also affect the
accuracy of replication of the genes in which they are encoded (self-
referent). In nature, self-reference may also not be a categorical trait, as how
much of the genome is affected by a mutation rate modifier can likely vary
both plastically and along a continuous scale. However, since we here show
the evolutionary dynamics of self-referent and non-self-referent mutation
rates to be starkly different, it is worth considering to what extent the
mutation rate modifier considered in a particular study is self-referent or not
- something that has been so far largely ignored in both the theoretical and
empirical literature on mutation rates.

Modelling approach

In general, our results align well with those obtained by Ram & Hadany
(2012), who, to our knowledge, conducted the only other theoretical study
concerning the evolution of condition-dependent mutation rates. They
concluded that condition-dependent mutation rates should evolve under a
wide range of circumstances as long as at least some mutations are
beneficial. In our model, the occurrence of beneficial mutations is most likely

                                                                                                             113
when the environment changes and the population becomes maladapted.
Accordingly, condition-dependent mutation rates do not evolve in a static (or
nearly static) environment. Note that the modelling approach we used here
is in many ways different from that of Ram & Hadany (2012). Ram & Hadany
(2012) analysed the fixation probability of individuals with a fixed condition-
dependence of the mutation rate in a population of individuals that express
a constitutive mutation rate. Our model follows the evolution of a flexible
condition-dependent mutation rate, which allows both condition-dependent
and constant (not condition-dependent) mutation strategies to emerge.
Furthermore, in the model of Ram & Hadany (2012) the mutation rate
responds to the presence of deleterious alleles, whereas in our model the
mutation rate is linked to the mismatch of the ecological trait and the
environment. Whilst the modelling of the condition-dependent mutation
rate in our model is more flexible than in previous models, it is worth noting
that our implementation still represents a simplification. We use only three
evolving loci to model conditional strategies, this significantly restricts the
shape of the function relating individual condition to the mutation rate.
Future models could use more loci, thereby allowing for more complex
functions to evolve.

Mutation rates in our model are also implemented in a rather simplified way
­ a necessary feature of simulation models. It is nevertheless worthwhile to
consider to what extent this implementation may reflect real-life mutation
processes. The high mutation rates that evolved in our models are rather
unrealistic, highlighting a drawback of this modelling approach: an
individual's adaptation to its environment is determined by a single evolving
locus, which is of course a strong simplification. In a real-world scenario, this
may be complicated by, e.g., traits under constant stabilizing selection (such
as traits required to maintain basic physiological functioning) or by
pleiotropic relationships between traits. The absence of such complications
in our models facilitates a clearer analysis but also leads to an
underestimation of the effect of deleterious mutations. This in turn leads to
the evolution of unrealistically high mutation rates. Nevertheless, the choice
not to model such additional traits or relationships was made deliberately to
keep the model simple, allowing us to observe effects governing mutation

114
rate evolution more easily. In the future, we aim to extend our model by
including extra traits that are not subject to fluctuating selection.

Mutation rates and the evolution of evolvability
Mutation rates are linked to a key concept in evolutionary biology:
evolvability, the capability of a biological system to undergo adaptive
evolution. Since mutation rates affect at what rate variation is generated,
they are a crucial determinant of evolvability (Badeau & Packard, 2003; Jones
et al., 2007; Riederer et al., 2022). Thus, our modelling results shed some
light on evolvability and its evolution. Firstly, we show that in fluctuating
environments, increased mutation rates and thus an increased ability to
track the environment evolves ­ in other words, evolvability itself is here
evolving. Secondly, we demonstrate that populations employing a condition-
dependent mutation strategy show better tracking of a changing
environment, i.e. they have greater evolvability. This is interesting
considering that determinants of evolvability can affect evolvability in
various, fundamentally different ways. These include generating variation
(e.g. through increased mutation rates) as well as shaping the fitness effects
of this variation (Riederer et al., 2022). Under a condition-dependent
mutation strategy, mutations mostly occur in maladapted individuals, where
they are more likely to be adaptive. Overall, this highlights how condition-
dependence in mutation rates can enhance evolvability by ensuring that the
variation created through mutation is more likely to be beneficial. It is also
clear that in our simulations the condition-dependent mutation rate strategy
emerges because of its effect on evolvability. Thus our results lend support
to the so-called "evolvability hypothesis" as discussed by MacLean et al.
(2013), which states that condition-dependent mutation rates in bacteria
evolved due to their effect on evolvability. We demonstrate that evolvability
can itself be shaped by selection, leading to the evolution of condition-
dependent mutation rates.

                                                                                                             115
Acknowledgements:

We thank Ella Rees-Baylis, Luke Pattipeilohy and the members of the MARM
group at the University of Groningen for discussions and input. This project
has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the
European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (Grant
agreement No. 789240).

116
References

Agrawal, A. F. (2002). Genetic loads under fitness-dependent mutation rates.
Journal of Evolutionary Biology, 15(6), 1004-1010.
Agrawal, A. F., & Wang, A. D. (2008). Increased transmission of mutations by
low-condition females: evidence for condition-dependent DNA repair. PLoS
Biology, 6(2), e30.
André, J. B., & Godelle, B. (2006). The evolution of mutation rate in finite
asexual populations. Genetics, 172(1), 611-626.
Baer, C. F. (2008). Does mutation rate depend on itself. PLoS Biology, 6(2),
e52.
Bedau, M. A., & Packard, N. H. (2003). Evolution of evolvability via adaptation
of mutation rates. Biosystems, 69(2-3), 143-162.
Bernhardt, J. R., O'Connor, M. I., Sunday, J. M., & Gonzalez, A. (2020). Life in
fluctuating environments. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B,
375(1814), 20190454.
Bjedov, I., Tenaillon, O., Gerard, B., Souza, V., Denamur, E., Radman, M., ... &
Matic, I. (2003). Stress-induced mutagenesis in bacteria. Science, 300(5624),
1404-1409.
Bürger, R., & Gimelfarb, A. (2002). Fluctuating environments and the role of
mutation in maintaining quantitative genetic variation. Genetics Research,
80(1), 31-46.
Carja, O., Liberman, U., & Feldman, M. W. (2014). Evolution in changing
environments: Modifiers of mutation, recombination, and migration.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111(50), 17935-17940.
Colegrave, N., & Collins, S. (2008). Experimental evolution: experimental
evolution and evolvability. Heredity, 100(5), 464-470.
Cirz, R. T., & Romesberg, F. E. (2007). Controlling mutation: intervening in
evolution as a therapeutic strategy. Critical Reviews in Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, 42(5), 341-354.

                                                                                                             117
Cipponi, A., Goode, D. L., Bedo, J., McCabe, M. J., Pajic, M., Croucher, D. R.,
... & Thomas, D. M. (2020). MTOR signaling orchestrates stress-induced
mutagenesis, facilitating adaptive evolution in cancer. Science, 368(6495),
1127-1131.
Couce, A., Caudwell, L. V., Feinauer, C., Hindré, T., Feugeas, J. P., Weigt, M.,
... & Tenaillon, O. (2017). Mutator genomes decay, despite sustained fitness
gains, in a long-term experiment with bacteria. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 114(43), E9026-E9035.
Debora, B. N., Vidales, L. E., Ramírez, R., Ramírez, M., Robleto, E. A., Yasbin,
R. E., & Pedraza-Reyes, M. (2011). Mismatch repair modulation of MutY
activity drives Bacillus subtilis stationary-phase mutagenesis. Journal of
Bacteriology, 193(1), 236-245.
Desai, M. M., Fisher, D. S., & Murray, A. W. (2007). The speed of evolution
and maintenance of variation in asexual populations. Current Biology, 17(5),
385-394.
Foster, P. L. (2007). Stress-induced mutagenesis in bacteria. Critical Reviews
in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 42(5), 373-397.
Ha, K. P., & Edwards, A. M. (2021). DNA Repair in Staphylococcus aureus.
Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews, 85(4), e00091-21.

Heidenreich, E. (2007). Adaptive mutation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Critical Reviews in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 42(4), 285-311.
Hodgkinson, A., & Eyre-Walker, A. (2011). Variation in the mutation rate
across mammalian genomes. Nature Reviews Genetics, 12(11), 756-766.
Jones, A. G., Arnold, S. J., & Bürger, R. (2007). The mutation matrix and the
evolution of evolvability. Evolution, 61(4), 727-745.
Lynch, M., Ackerman, M. S., Gout, J. F., Long, H., Sung, W., Thomas, W. K., &
Foster, P. L. (2016). Genetic drift, selection and the evolution of the mutation
rate. Nature Reviews Genetics, 17(11), 704-714.

118
Maslowska, K. H., Makiela-Dzbenska, K., & Fijalkowska, I. J. (2019). The SOS
system: a complex and tightly regulated response to DNA damage.
Environmental and Molecular Mutagenesis, 60(4), 368-384.

MacLean, R. C., Torres-Barceló, C., & Moxon, R. (2013). Evaluating
evolutionary models of stress-induced mutagenesis in bacteria. Nature
Reviews Genetics, 14(3), 221-227.

Monroe, J. G., Srikant, T., Carbonell-Bejerano, P., Becker, C., Lensink, M.,
Exposito-Alonso, M., ... & Weigel, D. (2022). Mutation bias reflects natural
selection in Arabidopsis thaliana. Nature, 602(7895), 101-105.

Ram, Y., & Hadany, L. (2012). The evolution of stress-induced hypermutation
in asexual populations. Evolution, 66(7), 2315-2328.

Ram, Y., and L. Hadany. 2014. Stress-induced mutagenesis and complex
adaptation. Proceedings of the Royal Society London, Series B 281:20141025

Ram, Y., & Hadany, L. (2019). Evolution of stress-induced mutagenesis in the
presence of horizontal gene transfer. The American Naturalist, 194(1), 73-89.

Ram, Y., L. Altenberg, U. Liberman, and M. W. Feldman. 2018. Generation of
variation and a modified mean fitness principle: necessity is the mother of
genetic invention. Theoretical Population Biology 123:1­8.

Riederer, J. M., Tiso, S., van Eldijk, T. J., & Weissing, F. J. (2022). Capturing the
facets of evolvability in a mechanistic framework. Trends in Ecology &
Evolution, 37(5), 430-439.

Sniegowski, P. D., Gerrish, P. J., & Lenski, R. E. (1997). Evolution of high
mutation rates in experimental populations of E. coli. Nature, 387(6634),
703-705.

Sniegowski, P. D., Gerrish, P. J., Johnson, T., & Shaver, A. (2000). The
evolution of mutation rates: separating causes from consequences.
Bioessays, 22(12), 1057-1066.

Sprouffske, K., Aguilar-Rodríguez, J., Sniegowski, P., & Wagner, A. (2018).
High mutation rates limit evolutionary adaptation in Escherichia coli. PLoS
Genetics, 14(4), e1007324.

                                                                                                             119
Shaw, F. H., & Baer, C. F. (2011). Fitness-dependent mutation rates in finite
populations. Journal of Evolutionary Biology, 24(8), 1677-1684.
Tenaillon, O., Denamur, E., & Matic, I. (2004). Evolutionary significance of
stress-induced mutagenesis in bacteria. Trends in Microbiology, 12(6), 264-
270.

120
Supplementary material

Figure S1. Evolution of condition-dependent mutation rates under weak selection. The
figure corresponds in all aspects to Figure 4 in the main text, but now the selection strength is
reduced from the default value  = 10 to  = 0.1, corresponding to a standard deviation of
5 = 2.24 of the Gaussian fitness function. Average duration of environmental stasis  =
100. This figure shows that even under relatively weak selection both condition-dependent
and non-condition-dependent mutation strategies still emerge.

                                                                                                             121
Figure S2. Evolution of a constitutive mutation rate when (A) the mutation rate is self-
referent and (B) the mutation rate at the mutator locus is fixed. Each panel shows 100
replicate simulations. Average duration of environmental stasis  = 100. Assuming a self-
referent mutation rate drastically accelerates the evolutionary dynamics. Panel A shows that
the value of a self-referent mutation rate rapidly fluctuates and also attains higher values
when compared to non-self-referent mutation rate shown in panel B.

122
           Interlude 1

                _______________________________________

The evolutionary persistence of a
 plastic phenotypic switch in the

        absence of selection

  Stefano Tiso*, Timo J.B. van Eldijk*, Jana M. Riederer*,
                         Franz J. Weissing

  *These authors contributed equally to the manuscript (shared first authorship)
  Published as part of Visser et al. (2021) Phenotypic plasticity explains apparent
reverse evolution of fat synthesis in parasitic wasps. Scientific Reports, 11(1), 7751.

                                                                                                            123
Introduction

During my PhD we collaborated with researchers from Louvain University
(BE) on a study on the apparent reverse evolution of lipogenesis in parasitic
wasps (Visser et al., 2021). We contributed by formulating a simulation
model to contextualize and corroborate the empirical section of this project.
Together with my colleagues, I developed an individual-based model that
showed how adaptive plastic responses can maintain functionality against
deleterious mutation for very long periods of time. Our conclusions from this
model helped to explain the apparent disappearance and re-evolution of
complex traits (such as lipogenesis) and resolve the apparent conflict of these
observations with Dollo's law of irreversibility (Chamberlain, 1905; Gould,
1970).

Caroline Nieberding, Bertanne Visser, and their collaborators detected the
presence of fatty acid synthesis (lipogenesis) in the parasitic wasp of the
species Leptopilina heterotoma. These parasitic wasps were never recorded
to express lipogenic activity before and were thought to have lost this
complex metabolic trait 200 million years previous as Ellers and Visser
pointed out in a previous publication (Visser et al, 2010). The overall absence
of this trait in parasitoid Hymenoptera is explained by the fact that parasitic
wasps' development takes place inside fat-rich insect larvae (Visser et al,
2010). Therefore, these wasps do not need to produce their own fat as they
can easily gain this resource from their host; and since lipogenesis is a costly
trait to maintain, they have gradually lost it. In the same publication,
however, the authors remark that in some cases host-generalist species
seemed to have re-evolved lipogenesis from scratch. This discovery seemed
to contradict one of the few law-like principles in evolutionary biology:
Dollo's law of irreversibility (Chamberlain, 1905). This principle articulated by
19th-century Belgian paleontologist Louis Dollo states that: "an organism
never returns exactly to a former state, even if it finds itself placed in
conditions of existence identical to those in which it has previously lived."
(Gould, 1970), meaning that an organism will never re-evolve the same
complex adaptation again, once they have lost it. To reconcile Dollo's law of
irreversibility and the reappearance of the apparently lost lipogenic

124
metabolism, Ellers, Nieberding and Visser speculated that lipogenesis was
never actually lost in parasitic wasps, but instead kept dormant in the vast
majority of cases and plastically reactivated only when strictly necessary. In
Visser et al., (2021), it was indeed shown that lipogenesis reappears when
these wasps are raised in larval hosts under starvation. These starved hosts
have very low body-fat percentages and thus do not present the parasitic
wasps with the fat-rich environment in which they normally develop, forcing
them to re-express lipogenesis. This explanation, however, requires that a
plastic response can maintain functionality over long periods of time even if
selection is not acting on it. One would normally expect that, in the absence
of selection deleterious mutations would accumulate and gradually
deteriorate the expressed trait. However, we argued that when considering
a network of genes and their non-linear interactions, instead of single genes
that only interact linearly, the effects of deleterious mutations would be
greatly reduced. Interconnected and nonlinear genomes are able to evolve
mutational robustness (Payne and Wagner, 2014; Masel and Trotter, 2010;
Edlund and Adami, 2004) allowing unselected traits to remain functional for
much longer periods of time. To corroborate this argument, we designed an
individual-based simulation to test if indeed it was possible for a plastic
phenotype-switch to maintain correct functionality (i.e. on in rare fat-poor
environments, off in frequent fat-rich environments). The results from this
model show that the on­off switch underlying plasticity can evolve
mutational robustness and be maintained in the genome for hundreds to
thousands of generations. This helped to solidify the conceptual background
necessary to support the claims and explanation of the empirical findings.
This work resulted in a publication (see Visser et al., 2021). Below, I give an
account of the modelling aspects of this article.

Model description

We consider the general situation where phenotypic plasticity is only
sporadically adaptive and ask the question of whether and under what
circumstances plasticity can remain functional over long evolutionary time
periods when the regulatory processes underlying plasticity are gradually

                                                                                                             125
broken down by mutations. We consider a regulatory mechanism that
switches on or off a pathway (like fat synthesis) in response to environmental
conditions (e.g., host fat content).

Fitness considerations

We assume that the local environment of an individual is characterized by

two factors: fat content  and nutrient content , where nutrients represent

sugars and other carbohydrates that can be used to synthesize fat. Nutrients

are measured in units corresponding to the amount of fat that can be

synthesized from them. We assume that fitness (viability and/or fecundity)

is directly proportional to the amount of fat stored by the individual. When

fat synthesis is switched off, this amount is equal to , the amount of fat in

the environment. When fat synthesis is switched on, the amount of fat stored

is assumed to be  -  + (1 - ). This expression reflects the following

assumptions: (1) fat is synthesized from the available nutrients, but this

comes at a fitness cost c; (2) fat can still be absorbed from the environment

but at a reduced rate (1 - ). It is adaptive to switch on fat synthesis if  -

 + (1 - ) is larger than , or equivalently if  < ( - )/. The right-

hand side of this inequality is a straight line, which is illustrated by the blue

line in Figure 1. The three boxes in Figure 1 illustrate three types of

environmental conditions. Red box: low-fat environments. Here,  <

( - )/ is always satisfied, implying that fat synthesis should be switched

on constitutively. Yellow box: high-fat environments. Here,  > ( - )/,

implying that fat synthesis should be switched off constitutively. Orange box:

intermediate-fat environments. Here, fat synthesis should be plastic and

switched on if for the given environment (, ) the fat content is below the

blue line and switched off otherwise. The simulations reported here were all

run  for  the  parameters    =  1  and    =  1  . We also investigated many other
                                2            4

combinations of these parameters; in all cases, the results were very similar

to those reported here.

126
Figure 1. Environmental conditions encountered by the model organisms. For a given
combination of environmental nutrient content  and environmental fat content , it is
adaptive to switch on fat synthesis if (, ) is below the blue line (corresponding to  <
( - )/) and to switch it off otherwise. The three boxes illustrate three types of
environment: a low-fat environment (red) where fat synthesis should be switched on
constitutively; a high-fat environment (yellow) where fat synthesis should be switched off
constitutively; and an intermediate-fat environment (orange) where a plastic switch is
selectively favored.

Gene regulatory networks

In our model, the switching device was implemented by an evolving gene
regulatory network (GRN, as in van Gestel and Weissing, 2016). As shown in
Figure 2, the networks considered had two receptor (or input) nodes, several
(levels of) processor nodes, and an effector node. The two receptor nodes
sense the fat and nutrient content in the local environment, respectively. The
effector node switches on fat synthesis if the combined weighted inputs from
all nodes connected to the effector node exceeds a threshold value T and
switches it off otherwise. We ran simulations for GRNs of varying complexity,
but for simplicity, we here focus on the simplest possible network, consisting
of just two receptor nodes and an effector node. If  and  are the local fat

                                                                                                             127
and nutrient content and  and  are the corresponding weighing factors,
fat synthesis is switched on if  +  >  (and off otherwise). Hence,
this simple GRN is characterised by the weighing factors  and  and the
threshold . Simulations (shown in Figure 3) are based on the most
straightforward possible network, consisting of two receptor nodes (sensing
the fat and the nutrient content in the local environment, respectively) and
an effector node that switches on fat synthesis if the combined weighted
input of the two receptor nodes exceeds a threshold value  and switches it
off otherwise. Hence, fat synthesis is switched on if  +  >  (and
off otherwise). The GRN is characterized by the weighing factors  and 
and the threshold . These parameters are transmitted from parents to
offspring, and they evolve subject to mutation and selection. For the simple
GRN described above, the switching device is 100% adaptive when the switch
is on (i.e.,  +  > ) if  < ( - )/ and off otherwise. A simple
calculation yields that this is the case if  > 0 and  = - and  =


Evolution of the GRN

For simplicity, we consider an asexual haploid population with discrete,
nonoverlapping generations and fixed population size of 10,000. Each
individual has several gene loci, each locus encoding one parameter of the
GRN. In the case of the simple network described above, there are three gene
loci, each with infinitely many alleles. Each individual harbors three alleles,
which correspond to the GRN parameters ,  and  , and hence
determine the functioning of the genetic switch. In the simulations, each
individual encounters a randomly chosen environment (, ). Based on its
(genetically encoded) GRN, the individual decides on whether to switch on
or off fat synthesis. If the synthesis is switched on, the individual's fitness is
given by  -  + (1 - ); otherwise, its fitness is given by .
Subsequently, the individuals produce offspring, where the number of
offspring produced is proportional to the individual's fitness. Each offspring
inherits the genetic parameters of its parent, subject to mutation. With
probability µ (per locus) a mutation occurs. In such a case the parental value
(in the case of a simple network: the parent's allelic value ,  or ) is
changed to a mutated value(  + ,  +  and  +  ) where the

128
mutational step size  is drawn from a normal distribution with mean zero
and standard deviation . In the reported simulations, we chose
µ = 0.001 and  = 0.1. The speed of evolution is proportional to µ · 2 ,
implying that the rate of change in Figure 3 (both the decay of plasticity and
the rate of regaining adaptive plasticity) are positively related to µ and .

Figure 2. GRNs of varying complexity were simulated. The results reported here refer to the
simplest GRN considered (encircled). Bottom: In-detail illustration of the functioning of the
simplest GRN. Two local concentrations of fat and nutrients  and  feed into two separate
connections and are multiplied by the respective connections weights:  and  . The values
of the two weighted inputs are then summed together. If the sum is larger then the threshold
value  the switch for plastic lipogenesis is switched on, otherwise it is kept off.

Preadaptation of the GRNs
Starting with a population with randomly initialized alleles for the GRN
parameters, we first let the population evolve for 10,000 generations in the
intermediate-fat environment (the orange box in Figure 1). In all replicate
simulations, a "perfectly adapted switch" (corresponding to  > 0 and
 = - and  = ) evolved, typically within 1,000 generations. Still,
the evolved GRNs differed across replicates, as they evolved different values

                                                                                                             129
of  > 0. These evolved networks were used to seed the populations in
the subsequent "decay" simulations.

Evolutionary decay of the GRNs

For the decay experiments reported in Figure 3, we initiated a large number
of monomorphic replicate populations with one of the perfectly adapted
GRNs from the preadaptation phase. These populations were exposed for an
extended period of time (1,000,000 generations) to a high-fat environment
(the yellow box in Figure 1), where all preadapted GRNs switched off fat
synthesis. However, in some scenarios, the environmental conditions
changed back sporadically (with probability ) to the intermediate-fat
environment (the orange box in Figure 1), where it is adaptive to switch on
lipogenesis in 50% of the environmental conditions (when (, ) is below
the blue line in Figure 1). In Figure 3, we report on the changing rates  = 0
(no changing back; red),  = 0.001 (changing back once every 1,000
generations; purple), and  = 0.01 (changing back once every 100
generations; pink). When such a change occurred, the population was
exposed to the intermediate-fat environment for  generations (Figure 3 is
based on  = 3).

Throughout the simulation, the performance of the network was monitored
every 100 generations as follows: 100 GRNs were chosen at random from the
population, and each of these GRNs was exposed to 100 randomly chosen
environmental conditions from the intermediate-fat environment (orange
box in Figure 1). From this, we could determine the average percentage of
"correct" decisions (where the network should be switched on if and only if
 < ( - )/. 1.0 means that the GRN is still making 100% adaptive
decisions; 0.5 means that the GRN only makes 50% adaptive decisions, as
would be expected by a random GRN or a GRN that switches the pathway
constitutively on or off. This measure for performance in the "old"
intermediate-fat environment was determined for 100 replicate simulations
per scenario and plotted in Figure 3 (mean ± standard deviation).

130
Results

If plasticity of fat synthesis arose in the common ancestor of parasitic wasps,
and wasps are generally exposed to lipid-rich hosts, the question arises
whether a switching device that is not used for extensive periods of time
should be lost during the course of evolution. To investigate this, we ran
individual-based simulations that monitored the sustained functionality of a
switching device (a gene regulatory network that could decay by mutation)
that is only sporadically used in evolutionary time. Figure 3 shows that the
switching device rapidly disintegrates (red simulations) if it is never used (see
the methods section for model assumptions, modeling details, and
simulation settings). However, even very infrequent use (pink: every 100
generations; purple: every 1000 generations) suffices to keep the switching
device largely intact. Interestingly, the switching device does not erode
gradually, but instead slowly evolves an improved performance over
evolutionary time (i.e., the percentage of correct decisions increases with the
increasing number of generations). An inspection of the evolving gene
regulatory networks (GRNs) reveals that they become more and more robust
(i.e., less and less affected by mutational decay), in line with earlier findings
on network evolution (Wagner, 2013). The simulations in Figure 3 are
representative of all networks and parameters considered. Whenever  = 0,
the performance of the regulatory switch eroded in evolutionary time, but
typically at a much lower rate in the case of the more complex GRNs.
Whenever  = 0.01, the performance of the switch went back to levels
above 90% and even above 95% for the more complex GRNs. Even for  =
0.001, a sustained performance level above 75% was obtained in all cases.
Intriguingly, in the last two scenarios the performance level first drops rapidly
(from 1.0 to a much lower level, although this drop is less pronounced in the
more complex GRNs) and subsequently recovers to reach high levels again.
Apparently, the GRNs have evolved a higher level of robustness, a property
that seems to be typical for evolving networks (Masel and Trotter, 2010;
Edlund and Adami, 2004; Wagner, 2008). For the simple GRN studied in
Figure 3, this outcome can be explained as follows. The initial network was
characterized by the genetic parameters  > 0,  = - and  = 
(see above), where  was typically a small positive number. In the course

                                                                                                             131
of evolutionary time, the relation between the three evolving parameters
remained approximately the same, but  (and with it the other
parameters) evolved to much larger values. This automatically resulted in an
increasingly robust network, since mutations with a given step size
distribution affect the performance of a network much less when the
corresponding parameter is large in absolute value. We also considered
alternative network structures (see Figure 2), and obtained very similar
results.

132
Figure 3. Simulation results comparing the average performance for different scenarios. We
first evolved replicate GRNs in a variable environment where it is adaptive to switch on a
metabolic pathway (fat synthesis) under low-fat conditions and to switch it off under high-fat
conditions. In generation 0, a monomorphic population was established, where all 10,000
individuals were endowed with the same well-performing GRN (different across replicates).
Subsequently, the population evolved subject to selection, mutation (µ = 0.001 per gene
locus), and genetic drift in a fat-rich environment, where it is adaptive to constitutively switch
off the metabolic pathway. Every 100 generations, we monitored the performance of a sample
of GRNs (percentage correct decisions) in the original (fat-variable) environment: 1.0 means
that the GRN is still making 100% adaptive decisions; 0.5 means that the GRN only makes 50%
adaptive decisions, as would be expected by a random GRN or a GRN that switches the
pathway constitutively on or off. The colored graphs show the average performance (±
standard deviation) of the GRNs for three scenarios (100 replicates per simulation). Red: the
population never again encounters the fat-variable environment; performance converges to
0.5, corresponding to constitutively switching off fat synthesis and hence the loss of adaptive
plasticity. Pink: the individuals encounter a fat-variable environment on average every 100
generations; after an initial rapid drop in performance, a sustained high performance (> 90%
correct decisions) of the GRNs is regained after about 100,000 generations. Purple: the
individuals encounter a fat-variable environment on average every 1000 generations; after an
initial rapid drop in performance, an intermediate performance (> 75% correct decisions) is
regained gradually.

                                                                                                             133
Discussion

We showed that a switch underlying plastic responses evolves mutational
robustness and can withstand decay if it remains unused for extended
periods of time. Another modeling study found that adaptive plasticity will
be maintained in the genome for 108 generations (Masel et al, 2007). Our
simulation study shows that non-switching rapidly evolves in a fat-rich
environment (leading to the loss of plasticity), but once the device has
evolved mutational robustness, only incidental `switching on' of the trait is
sufficient for plasticity to be maintained within the genome. Plasticity itself
can thus be highly robust to mutational change, which can apply also to other
traits and systems. Our results further revealed large differences in the
slopes of reaction norms between families, suggesting that there is genetic
variation for plastic expression of fat 8 synthesis. The plasticity of fat
synthesis itself may thus evolve according to the local fat availability of host
populations in the wild. Phenotypically plastic organisms can incur different
types of costs (Auld et al, 2010). In our simple model, we only consider the
cost of phenotype-environment mismatching, that is, the costs of expressing
the `wrong' phenotype in a given environment. When placed in a high-fat
environment, the preadapted GRNs in our simulations take the `right'
decision to switch off lipogenesis. Accordingly, they do not face any costs of
mismatching. Yet, the genetic switch rapidly decays (as indicated in Figure 3
by the rapid drop in performance when tested in an intermediate-fat
environment), due to the accumulation of mutations. It is not unlikely that
there are additional fitness costs of plasticity, such as the costs for the
production and maintenance of the machinery underlying plasticity (Auld et
al, 2010). In the presence of such constitutive costs, plasticity will be selected
against when organisms are living in an environment where only one
phenotype is optimal (as in the high- and low-fat environments in Figure 1).
This would obviously affect the evolutionary dynamics in Figure 3, but the
size of the effect is difficult to judge, as the constitutive costs of plasticity are
notoriously difficult to quantify. In the case of the simple switching device
considered in our model, we consider the constitutive costs of plasticity as
marginal, but these costs might be substantial in other scenarios.

134
References

Auld JR, Agrawal AA, Relyea RA (2010) Re-evaluating the costs and limits of
adaptive phenotypic plasticity. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences 277(1681):503­511
Chamberlain CJ (1905) The laws of evolution. Science 22(555):206­211.
Edlund JA, Adami C (2004) Evolution of robustness in digital organisms.
Artificial Life 10(2):167­179.
van Gestel J, Weissing FJ (2016) Regulatory mechanisms link phenotypic
plasticity to evolvability. Scientific Reports 6(1):24524.
Gould SJ (1970) Dollo on Dollo's law: Irreversibility and the status of
evolutionary laws. Journal of the History of Biology 3(2):189­212
Masel J, Trotter MV (2010) Robustness and evolvability. Trends in Genetics
26(9):406­414.
Masel J, King OD, Maughan H (2007) The loss of adaptive plasticity during
long periods of environmental stasis. American Naturalist 169(1):38­46.
Payne JL, Wagner A (2014) The robustness and evolvability of transcription
factor binding sites. Science 343(6173):875­877.
Visser B, Le Lann C, Den Blanken FJ, et al (2010) Loss of lipid synthesis as an
evolutionary consequence of a parasitic lifestyle. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
107(19):8677­8682.
Visser B, Alborn HT, Rondeaux S, et al (2021) Phenotypic plasticity explains
apparent reverse evolution of fat synthesis in parasitic wasps. Scientific
Reports 11(1):1­ 13.
Wagner A (2008) Robustness and evolvability: A paradox resolved.
Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 275(1630):91­100.
Wagner A (2013) Robustness and evolvability in living systems. Princeton
University Press

                                                                                                             135
136
            Chapter 5

                _______________________________________

   The evolution of mutational
      transformers speeds up
      adaptation in a changing
             environment

Timo J.B. van Eldijk*, Stefano Tiso*, G. Sander van Doorn &
                         Franz J. Weissing

  *These authors contributed equally to the manuscript (shared first authorship)
                                          In preparation

                                                                                                            137
Abstract

At the genetic level, mutations are generally assumed to be random with
respect to the 'demands' of natural selection. Yet, it has been
demonstrated that mutations are often biased with respect to their
phenotypic effects. Such biases can be important, as they allow the rapid
adaptation of a population to changing conditions. Here, we demonstrate
that adaptation-enhancing biases can readily evolve in a fluctuating
environment. To this end, we consider a population that is exposed to a
stochastically changing environment. The environment can be in two states
for which different phenotypes are adaptive. The phenotype of an
individual is determined by a gene regulatory network that cannot sense
the environmental state and can therefore only adapt to environmental
change through mutation and selection. In our model, the mutation process
at the genetic level is random and not evolvable. Yet, even small networks
rapidly evolve a structure that biases the phenotypic effects of mutations
in such a way that adaptive evolution after environmental change is
speeded up considerably. We term the mechanism responsible for this
increase in evolvability a "mutational transformer". A mutational
transformer is a network configuration where the phenotypic effects of
genetic mutations are distributed in such a way that substantial adaptation
to new conditions can be achieved via a single or few genetic mutations.
We show that in our model mutational transformers are based on two
distinct mechanisms: mutation amplification and mutation canalisation.

Introduction

Evolvability concerns "the capability of a biological system to undergo
adaptive evolution"(Payne & Wagner, 2019; Pigliucci, 2008; Riederer, Tiso,
van Eldijk, & Weissing, 2022). The mechanisms that govern evolvability are
subject to evolution themselves; hence, evolvability is far from a static
property but is shaped by selection and other evolutionary processes. For
instance, mutation rates can evolve to increase the production of variation
under stressful conditions, thereby enhancing evolvability (Metzgar & Wills,
2000; Sprouffske, Aguílar-Rodríguez, Sniegowski, & Wagner, 2018; Woods et
al., 2011). Evolvability can also change over the generations through the

138
evolution of mechanisms that amplify, buffer, or bias the effect of (genetic)
variation on fitness (Kokko et al., 2017; Pavlicev & Hansen, 2011; Uller,
Moczek, Watson, Brakefield, & Laland, 2018), phenomena that are
sometimes referred to as developmental bias and/or canalisation (Crombach
& Hogeweg, 2008; Riederer et al., 2022; Waddington, 1942). These
mechanisms alter the genotype-to-phenotype map that describes how
changes at the genetic level translate into phenotypic differences. Any
alteration of this map can have implications for the dynamics and outcome
of evolutionary processes (Greenbury, Louis, & Ahnert, 2022; McGuigan &
Aw, 2017; Takeuchi & Hogeweg, 2012).

Some genotype-to-phenotype maps enhance evolvability more than others
(Riederer et al., 2022). This may simply be a coincidence or a side-effect of
other processes. However, it is worth considering the possibility that the
structure of the genotype-to-phenotype map has been selected for
evolvability, so as to facilitate rapid adaptation to frequently encountered
environmental changes. In several empirical systems, there is evidence for
this, as after a commonly encountered environmental change, a highly
adaptive phenotype can be achieved via a single or very few mutations with
large phenotypic effect. A first example concerns the rapid emergence of
antibiotically resistant subpopulations that quickly arise in bacterial
populations grown from a single susceptible clone (`heteroresistance'). This
extremely fast acquisition of resistance is associated with the spontaneous
tandem amplification of specific resistance-enhancing genes (Andersson,
Nicoloff, & Hjort, 2019; Band & Weiss, 2019; Hjort, Nicoloff, & Andersson,
2016; Nicoloff, Hjort, Levin, & Andersson, 2019; Pereira, Larsson, Hjort, Elf, &
Andersson, 2021). A second example concerns the adaptation of the yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae to heat stress. Rapid adaptation to a higher-
temperature environment can be provided by the duplication of a single
chromosome. This duplication simultaneously upregulates a multitude of
genes that provide adaptation to a higher temperature (Yona et al., 2012). In
these and other examples, the structure of the genotype-to-phenotype
seems to have evolved to facilitate rapid adaptation. The idea that the
structure of the genotype-to-phenotype map evolves to facilitate the

                                                                                                             139
generation of adaptive variation has also been proposed and extensively
discussed in the theory of facilitated variation (Solopova et al., 2012).

But how can the genotype-to-phenotype map evolve in a way that random
genetic mutations have phenotypic effects that speed up adaptive evolution?
A key theoretical study on this question was performed by Anton Crombach
and Paulien Hogeweg (Crombach & Hogeweg, 2008), who considered the
evolution of gene regulatory networks (GRNs) that generated expression
patterns, which in turn resulted in a specific phenotypic effect. A population
of individuals evolved in an environment that alternated between two states,
each selecting for a different target GRN expression pattern. The authors
observed that throughout evolution the GRNs re-organized to allow for
increasingly rapid switching between the two target expression patterns.
Moreover, the increasing rate of adaptation was accompanied by a reduction
in the number of mutations required to switch between expression patterns.
These findings clearly demonstrate that structural features can evolve to
enhance evolvability: whilst the frequency and type of genetic mutations
remain random and constant, the GRNs evolve to be structured in such a way
that a single or very few mutations are sufficient to switch to a phenotype
that is well-adapted to the new environment. In a follow-up study, Hogeweg
and colleagues (Cuypers, Rutten, & Hogeweg, 2017) showed that such a
mutational configuration can also evolve in GRNs that are able to sense the
environment and, hence, can evolve phenotypic plasticity. The results of
(Crombach & Hogeweg, 2008) and (Cuypers et al., 2017) showcase clear
instances of the evolution of developmental biases toward an adaptive
phenotype. We here term the underlying configuration a "mutational
transformer": the GRN is structure transforms the phenotypic impact of
mutations in such a way that a single or very few mutations allow for a switch
to a different adaptive phenotype, facilitating rapid adaptation. The name
indicates that a population has evolved to use mutation (and not plasticity)
to rapidly switch between alternative adaptive phenotypic states.

The studies of Hogeweg and colleagues provide proof of principle that
mutational transformers can evolve. However, the GRNs and their
phenotypic effects in (Crombach & Hogeweg, 2008) and (Cuypers et al.,
2017) are quite complex, making it difficult to see how the mutational

140
transformers arise and how they function. Moreover, it remains unclear
whether such complexity is essential for mutational transformers to evolve.
Here, we therefore take a minimal modelling approach that allows us to
study in detail whether, when, and how the distribution of phenotypic effects
of random genetic mutations evolves under changing environmental
conditions. To this end, we consider simple heritable GRNs consisting of a
small number of interacting nodes and a single phenotypic output value. The
performance of a network is determined by how well this output value
matches the current state of the environment. In line with (Crombach &
Hogeweg, 2008), we evolve these GRNs in an environment that randomly
alternates between two different states. The GRNs considered cannot sense
their environment, making it impossible to evolve phenotypic plasticity.
Accordingly, individuals whose phenotype matches one environment will
inevitably be mismatched to the other. Thus, the only way in which an
individual's phenotype can track environmental change is through mutation
and genetic evolution of their GRN. Over a long period of evolution, in which
the population has been repeatedly selected to adapt to a transition
between environmental states, we expect the evolution of a mutational
transformer, that is, the evolution of networks that rely on a smaller number
of mutations to change their phenotype from one optimal phenotype to the
other. In a first step, we will demonstrate that mutational transformers do
indeed evolve even in very simple networks, consisting of merely two nodes
and encoded by just three gene loci. This allows us to investigate the
evolution and functioning of a mutational transformer in considerable depth
and detail. Subsequently, we study how the complexity of the GRN influences
the evolution of a mutational transformer. Besides varying the number of
nodes, we also investigate whether non-linear interactions in the gene
regulatory network allow for the evolution of more efficient mutational
transformers.

Model

Model overview

The model structure is illustrated in Figure 1. Each simulation follows a
population of fixed size (1,000 individuals) over a period of 1 million

                                                                                                             141
generations. Generations are discrete and non-overlapping and reproduction
is asexual. The individuals are living in an environment that can be in one of
two states (E1 or E2). The state is constant throughout a generation (and the
same for all individuals), but it switches stochastically to the other state once
in a while. Each individual has a phenotype y that is determined by a heritable
gene regulatory network. Phenotype  = +0.5 is optimal in environment E1,
while  = -0.5 is optimal in environment E2. The `fitness' (expected
reproductive success) of an individual is negatively related to the distance of
its phenotype y from the optimal value opt of its environment.

142
Figure 1. Graphical illustration of the model. A. Determination of the phenotype of an
individual. Each individual harbours a heritable gene regulatory network (GRN) that
determines the individual's phenotype. The panel shows the simplest network, which consists
of two connected nodes (coloured circles). The working of the network is characterised by two
baseline activation levels b1 and b2, the connection weight w, and the expression function
f(x), which is either the identity function (left) or a sigmoidal function (right). The phenotype
y of an individual is fully determined by these ingredients. The parameters b1, b2, and w are
encoded by alleles at three gene loci and transmitted from a parent to its offspring, subject to
rare mutations. All three loci have the same mutation rate and the mutational step size is
normally distributed around zero. B. The environment fluctuates stochastically between two
states (E1 and E2). The duration of the periods between environmental switch events is
geometrically distributed, with a mean value of 100 generations. In each state, there is a
different optimal phenotypic value (indicated in green). C. Individuals are selected to minimise
the mismatch between their phenotype y and the optimal phenotype opt in the current
environment: the expected reproductive success of an individual is given by a Gaussian
function of this mismatch and therefore decreases with the squared mismatch between y and
opt. D. Selection and mutation determine (together with genetic drift) determine how the
genotype distribution (and the corresponding phenotype distribution) change from one
generation to the next.

                                                                                                             143
Each individual harbours a GRN that is encoded by N gene loci (where N
depends on the network architecture). The alleles at these loci are real
numbers whose values represent the strength of gene-gene interactions and
basal gene-activity levels (Figure 1A). Together, the GRN alleles of an
individual determine the individual's phenotype. These alleles are
transmitted from parent to offspring, subject to rare mutations. At the start
of each generation, 1,000 offspring are produced. In a first step, a parent is
assigned to each offspring by drawing an individual from the previous
generation (with replacement) by means of a weighted lottery where the
weighing factor of each potential parent is proportional to the fitness of that
individual. This procedure ensures that the `fitness' of each individual in the
parental population is proportional to the individual's expected reproductive
success. Each newly produced offspring inherits all GRN alleles from its
parent. Subsequently, mutation takes place: at each GRN locus, a mutation
takes place with a certain mutation probability that is fixed and the same for
all loci. If a mutation takes place, the parental allele a is changed by adding a
small number (the mutational step size) to it. For all loci, the mutational step
sizes are drawn from the same normal distribution with mean zero and a
small mutational variance. After mutation has taken place, the offspring's
phenotype is determined, which, in turn, determines the fitness of the
offspring.

This procedure results in an evolutionary trajectory that is governed by the
interplay of selection, mutation, and genetic drift. At the genetic level, the
mutation process is completely random, that is, not affected by the state (or
the state dynamics) of the environment: the mutation rate and the
distribution of mutational step sizes remain constant throughout each
simulation. However, the phenotypic effect of a mutation depends on the
allelic values at the GRN loci (see below). Accordingly, the distribution of
phenotypic mutational effects can evolve. We are interested in the evolution
of this distribution and the corresponding evolution of the `evolvability' of
the population, which we quantify by the speed with which the new
phenotypic optimum is approached after each change of the environment.

144
Environmental change
In each generation, the environment is in one of two states (E1 or E2). At the
start of each generation, the environment switches from the previous state
to the alternative state with probability  = 0.01. Hence the duration of
environmental stasis is geometrically distributed with mean value -1 =
100 generations.

Fitness
The optimal phenotype in environmental state E1 is opt = 0.5, while it is
opt = -0.5 in state E2. The fitness of an individual with phenotype y
decreases with the mismatch  - opt with the environmental optimum in a
Gaussian manner:

                       () = ( -   ( - opt)2).

The parameter S quantifies the strength of selection. In all our simulations
 = 2.

Gene regulatory networks
The phenotype of an individual is encoded by a gene regulatory network.
There are various ways to model GRNs. We here follow (van Gestel &
Weissing, 2016), where the flow of information through the network (via
gene activation and inhibition) is modelled in close analogy to that of artificial
neural networks. The GRNs considered are multilayered and feedforward:
they consist of one initial node, multiple layers of internal nodes, and one
output node. The type of network will be indicated by the notation n1-n2-n3-
1, where nk is the number of nodes in layer k, and the 1 to the right denotes
the output node. For Instance, 1-2-2-2-1 refers to a network with one initial
layer of one node and three internal layers with two nodes per layer. The
simplest network considered does not have internal layers and is of type 1-
1. This network is shown in Fig. 1A.
Each node j of the GRN has an activation state xj and produces an output  =
(), where f is the so-called transfer function of the node. The activation

                                                                                                             145
state of a node j is given by the node's baseline activation  and a weighted
sum of the outputs of the nodes in the previous layer:

                 =  +     =  +    (),

where i ranges over all nodes of the previous layer. The baseline activation
values  and the connection weights  are real numbers that are
transmitted from parents to their offspring (subject to rare mutations).
Together with the transfer function, they fully determine the functioning of
the GRN and the resulting phenotype: The initial nodes have no inputs from
other nodes. Accordingly, their activation state is  =  and its output is
 = (). Together with the weighing factors , where j ranges over the
nodes of the second layer, this determines the activation states  and the
output  = () of these nodes. These again determine the activation
states and the output values of the nodes in the third layer, and so on. In the
end, the output node  is reached. As before, the activation level  of this
node is determined by this node's baseline activation level  and a
weighted sum of the outputs of the nodes of the previous layer. In our model,
the output of the terminal node  = () corresponds to the phenotype
of the individual ( =  = ()).
The simplest network of type 1-1 (illustrated in Fig. 1A) has only two nodes:
the input node 0 and the output node . Hence, there are only three
heritable parameters: the baseline activation levels 0 and  and the
weighing factor 0, which, for simplicity, we call w. In view of the above
rules, the phenotype of an individual with a 1-1 network is therefore given
by:

            = () = ( +   0) = ( +   (0)).

We will consider two transfer functions. The simplest is the identity function
() = . In this case, the phenotype of an individual is given by the
relationship  =  +   0. The second is the sigmoidal function
(illustrated in Fig. 1A) () = (1+||).

146
Inheritance and mutation
Individuals are haploid and have an allele at all GRN loci, that is, at the loci
encoding the baseline activation values  and the connection weights .
The alleles are real numbers that are transmitted from parents to their
offspring, subject to mutation. The per-locus mutation probability is  =
0.01. If a mutation occurs, a mutational step size is drawn from a normal
distribution (0, ) with mean sigma and mutational standard deviation  =
0.1. This step size is added to the parental value, yielding the new mutated
value.

Quantifying evolvability
To assess whether long-term evolution in a fluctuating environment
enhances evolvability, we need to quantify the rate of adaptation to a new
environmental state after a change in the environment. To this end, we
operationally define the "time to adaptation" as the number of generations
it takes until the mean fitness of the population reaches a threshold value of
0.9. In two situations, no "time to adaptation" is recorded: (a) if the threshold
value is not reached before another change in environmental state occurs,
and (b) if immediately after a change in environment the mean fitness of the
population already exceeds the threshold value. However, we record how
often situations (a) and (b) do occur.

Results

Network structure and the evolution of mutational transformers
The example simulation in Figure 2 illustrates that, in the course of long-term
evolution, the time to adaptation substantially decreases even in the case of
a simple 1-1 GRN with identity transfer function. The substantial decrease in
the time to adaptation from the start of the simulation (Fig. 2A) to the end
of the simulation (Fig. 2B) suggests that a "mutational transformer" has
evolved, that is, a change in the way how random mutations at the genetic
level translate into changes of the phenotype.

                                                                                                             147
To check for the generality of this result, we run multiple replicate
simulations for a wide range of GRN architectures. GRNs varied in the
number of layers, the number of nodes per layer, and the type of transfer
function. Figure 3 shows the results for four network architectures (1, 1-1,
10-2-1-1-1 and 5-5-5-1) and both transfer functions. In each case, the time to
adaptation was reported in relation to the duration of evolution. If a
mutational transformer evolves, the time to adaptation should decrease in
the course of evolution. This does not happen for the trivial "network" 1
(consisting of just one output node and therefore arguably not really a
network). As shown in Fig. 3A, the time to adaptation did not noticeably
decrease in the course of evolution, neither for the identity nor for the
sigmoidal transfer function. In contrast, there is a pronounced decrease in
the time to adaptation in GRNs of type 1-1 (Fig. 3B), both in the case of an
identity transfer function (for which this phenomenon is illustrated by Fig. 2)
and even more so in case of a sigmoidal transfer function

Figure 2. Time to adaptation at (A) the start and (B) the end of long-term evolution. For an
example simulation based on a 1-1 network with identity transfer function, the graphs show
the drop and increase in mean fitness after two instances of environmental change. The state
of the environment is indicated by the background colour (blue: opt = 0.5, red: opt = -0.5).
The dashed line indicates the threshold value of 0.9 used to quantify the time to adaptation.
In the early part of the simulation (Panel A: generations 200 to 400), the mean fitness of the
population recovers much more slowly after environmental change than in the end of the
simulation (Panel B: the final 200 generations).

148
The boxplots in Fig. 3CD show, for the GRNs considered, the time to
adaptation in the second half of the evolutionary trajectory. In all cases, the
initial time to adaptation was typically 50 generations or more. With the
exception of the trivial "network" 1, the time to adaptation decreased in all
cases to a median value between 5 and 10 in the second half of the
simulations (the final 500,000 generations). In other words, all non-trivial
GRNs allowed for the evolution of a faster rate of adaptation (i.e., higher
evolvability). There is no clear relationship between network complexity and
the evolved time to adaptation. However, for any network architecture
considered, the evolved time to adaptation was markedly shorter for the
sigmoidal transfer function than for the identity function. We will now
investigate in more detail how the reduction in adaptation time was
achieved. For this, it will be useful to consider the two transfer functions
separately.

                                                                                                             149
150
Figure 3. Evolution of the time to adaptation for GRNs differing in complexity and transfer
function. A. For the trivial "network" with just one output node, no evolutionary trend in the
time to adaptation was observed, neither in the case of the identity transfer function (left
panel) nor in the case of a sigmoidal transfer function (right panel). Point colours indicate the
two different environments. B. For the 1-1 network, the time to adaptation markedly
decreased in the initial phase of evolution (first 10,000 generations), for both transfer
functions. C. Evolved time to adaptation during the last 500,000 generations of the simulation
for GRNs differing in architecture (1, 1-1, 10-2-1-1-1 and 5-5-5-1) and transfer function
(identity or sigmoidal). In the boxplots, the data of 7-10 replicate simulations are combined.
With the exception of the trivial "network" 1, a fast adaptation rate evolved in all GRNs. D. A
zoomed-in version of panel C, showing only those types of GRN that evolved a fast rate of
adaptation. This panel shows that the GRNs with a sigmoidal transfer function evolved a faster
rate of adaptation than GRNs with the same architecture but an identity transfer function.

                                                                                                             151
152
Figure 4. Phenotypic effects of mutations at the three loci of a 1-1 GRN that evolved a fast
rate of adaptation. Data in (A-C) reflect a mutational analysis of a 1-1 GRN with linear transfer
function that had evolved a fast rate of adaptation. The panels show the phenotypic effects of
random mutations at A. the b1 locus, B. the w locus, and C. the b2 locus. The allelic values
before mutation are indicated by the solid red line. The phenotype produced by the
unmutated GRN (indicated by the dotted red line) matches the current environmental
optimum (which happens to be equal to -0.5). The dotted green line indicates the alternative
optimum (0.5), the "desired" value after a change in environment. While the mutational
effects on the phenotype are relatively small in case of the b1 and the b2 locus, the w locus
acts as a mutation amplifier: the other phenotypic optimum can be reached with just one or
two mutations, which is the defining property of a mutational transformer.

                                                                                                             153
Mutational amplifiers cause mutational transformation in linear GRNs

To understand the inner workings of a network that evolved a fast mutation
rate, we first study the simplest type of GRN: a network with two nodes and
a linear transfer function (1-1). The behaviour of this GRN is controlled by
only three loci: b1, w, and b2. When analysing the results of many replicate
simulations, we observe that in this linear GRN, either the w locus or the b1
locus evolves to become responsible for the fast adaptation; this locus is the
sensitive locus that acts as a mutational transformer. This is illustrated by
Figure 4, which shows for an evolved example network the phenotypic
effects of genetic mutations at each of the three loci. While the phenotypic
effects of mutations at the b1 and b2 locus are very small (Fig. 4AC), the
sensitive w-locus acts as a "mutation amplifier": mutations at this locus have
a large effect on the phenotype, allowing the rapid evolution of the
phenotype to a new optimum, should the environment require this. In fact,
the distribution of phenotypic effects induced by small-scale and normally
distributed mutations at the w-locus encompass both phenotypic optima.
Hence, if a GRN is adapted to one phenotypic optimum, the other phenotypic
optimum can be produced by just one or two mutations. To summarise these
findings: The amplification of small mutations on the sensitive locus to large
phenotypic changes, allows the alternate optimal phenotype to be reached
through a single mutation, thereby facilitating rapid adaptation when the
environment changes, creating a mutational transformer.

These results can be explained by the fact that for the network considered
the phenotype of an individual is given by  =   1 + 2 (see Methods).
This shows that b1 and w have a similar effect on the phenotype and explains
why both corresponding loci can be sensitive. The phenotypic effect of
mutations at the w locus are amplified by a factor b1, the current value of
b1. Hence, the allele at the b1 locus regulates the phenotypic effects of w-
mutations, and vice versa.

Non-linear GRNs evolve more refined mutational transformers

For all network architecture considered, the evolved time to adaptation was
markedly shorter for the sigmoidal transfer function than for the identity

154
function (Figure 3D). We hypothesise that non-linear gene interactions allow
for the evolution of a more refined mutational transformer. To understand
this, we now examine the simplest nonlinear GRN that managed to evolve a
mutational transformer (i.e. 1-1, see Figure 5). Figure 5A illustrates that in
the initial phase of evolution (in generations 200 to 400, left panel) it takes
more than 50 generations before, after a change of the environment, the
mean fitness of the population has regained the value 0.9, while the time to
adaptation is much faster (between 5 and 10 generations) in the final stage
of evolution (right panel). This is achieved by a marked differentiation of the
alleles b1, w, and b2 at the three GRN loci (Fig. 5B). This raises the question:
how does the evolution of these loci translate to the evolution of a
mutational transformer? To investigate this, we record the phenotypes
produced by 1000 different mutations at each locus of the best-performing
GRN at a certain time point (Figure 5C). Initially all loci are similarly sensitive
to mutations and the distribution of the phenotypes produced is unimodal.
Most mutations will only slightly alter the value of the currently expressed
phenotype. This explains why, at the start of the simulation, the recovery of
the population after an environmental change is slow and gradual: after an
environmental change, many mutations are required to shift to the new
optimal phenotype.

Towards the end of the simulation, when the population is able to recover
rapidly from environmental change (i.e. the mutational transformer has
evolved), we observe that the phenotype is highly sensitive to mutations at
a particular, sensitive, locus. We observed this same pattern in the linear
GRNs, where a single gene evolved to be sensitive to mutations. However,
instead of being unimodal as for the 1-1 GRN with an identity transfer
function (Figure 4), the distribution of phenotypes produced by mutations at
the sensitive locus of non-linear 1-1 GRN is bimodal, that is, with two peaks
(Figure 5C, panels 3 and 4). The two peaks coincide with the two optimal
phenotypes showing that the GRN has evolved to bias the effect of random
mutations toward these phenotypes. The distribution of phenotypic effects
of mutations on the sensitive locus is shaped such that the phenotype to
which the population is currently adapted is most frequently produced. The
second peak in the distribution of the phenotypic effects of mutations

                                                                                                             155
corresponds with the optimal phenotype of the alternative environment.
This mechanism seems to be symmetrical: after adaptation to an
environmental change, the new optimal phenotype is now produced more
often. If mutation leads to an intermediate phenotype that is between the
two different optimal phenotypes, mutations are equally likely to produce
either of the two optimal phenotypes.
In all non-linear GRNs considered (1-1, 10-2-1-1-1 and 5-5-5-1), a sensitive
locus with similar properties evolved and it always occurred in the initial part
of the GRN (either at the b0 locus or at one of the loci encoding the weighing
factor w0j of the connection between the initial node and a node j in the first
processing layer).

156
Figure 5. Evolution of a refined mutational transformer. The figure shows a representative
simulation of the evolution of a 1-1 GRN with sigmoidal transfer function. A. Evolutionary
trajectory of mean population fitness at the start (generations 200 to 400, left panel) and the
end (final 200 generations, right panel) of the simulation. The state of the environment is
indicated by the background colour (blue: opt = 0.5, red: opt = -0.5). B. Evolved allelic
values at the three network loci at the start (left panel) and the end (right panel) of the
simulation. C. Distributions of the phenotypic effects of mutations at four different time points
during the simulation. The first two time points are early in the simulation, shortly before
(beeafrolyre) and after (aefatrelry) an environmental change. The other time points are from a later
stage in the simulation, shortly before (blaetfeore) and after (alaftteer) an environmental change. A
comparison of the phenotypic-effect distributions at the early time points with those at the
later time points reveals that for two of the GRN loci genetic mutations have a small effect on
the phenotype, while the GRN locus encoding b1 is "sensitive": mutations at this locus produce
a broad spectrum of phenotypes. Moreover, the distribution of phenotypic effects at the
sensitive locus is strongly asymmetric and bimodal, with a sharp peak close to the current
environmental optimum and a second maximum close to phenotypic optimum at the other
environmental state.

                                                                                                             157
The inner workings of a refined mutational transformer: a mutation
canaliser

The mutational transformers that evolve in non-linear GRNs represent a
more refined solution when compared to the mutational amplifiers observed
in linear GRNs. This is highlighted by the faster recovery of performance after
an environmental change (Figure 3 C-D). The non-linear GRNs evolve their
architecture, not only to put the two optimal phenotypes in the range of a
single mutation step, but also to canalise the phenotypic outcomes of
mutations towards particular phenotypic values. We term this more refined
mechanism underlying the evolution of a mutational transformer in
nonlinear GRNs a mutation canaliser.

The behaviour of the non-linear 1-1 GRN is governed by only three
parameters which allow for numerical analysis (Figure 6). This allowed us to
study how mutations on the sensitive locus affect not only the output of the
second node (phenotype) but also how they affect the output of the first
(intermediate) node. Applying normally distributed mutations to the evolved
value of locus b1 leads to a slightly skewed distribution of node 1 output
values. The values of the b2 and w loci have evolved so that when the skewed
distribution of outputs of node 1 is fed into node 2 it is transformed to a
bimodal distribution of phenotypes (output values). As can be seen in Figure
6 A, the ability of node 2 to transform the asymmetrical distribution of
outputs of node 1 into a bimodal distribution of phenotypes relies on the
presence of a non-linear (sigmoidal) transform function. This shows why in
our minimal model the ability to canalise mutations towards particular
phenotypic values is contingent on the presence of a non-linear transfer
function. As we previously noted the mechanism of a mutational canaliser
seems to be symmetrical, after mutation to the other environmental
optimum a bimodal distribution of phenotypes is maintained. Figure 6 B
shows that this symmetry is a consequence of the sigmoid transfer function.
If we apply the average mutation to the sensitive locus (b1 =+ 0.1 in Figure 6
B) this causes the bimodal distribution to "flip". The main phenotypic peak
now sits on the alternative optimum and the smaller peak on the current
optimum. This, therefore, shows that canalisers not only have evolved to
easily move to an alternative adaptive phenotype but that they have also

158
evolved an architecture that allows them to easily revert back to the previous
adaptive phenotype as well.

                                                                                                             159
160
Figure 6. Transformation of normally distributed genetic mutations into a bimodal
distribution of phenotypic effects. The plots in each panel (A, B) show how different 1-1
networks transform a normal distribution of mutations on the sensitive locus (b1 in this
case) into a (different) distribution of phenotypes. A represents an evolved and adapted
GRN, and B shows the same GRN but now with a mutated/perturbed value of its sensitive
locus, The values of the sensitive locus are on the x-axis of the plots on the left column, while
the values of the phenotype are projected on the y-axis of the plots on the right column. The
plots on the left show the mapping of mutations on b1 to outputs of node 1, the solid red
line corresponds with the non-mutated original value of b1, while the dashed red line shows
the value of the corresponding original output. The plots on the right show how the
distribution of outputs of node 1 (now on the x-axis) is transformed into a distribution of
phenotypes (outputs of node 2, y-axis). Also in this case the red and dashed line mark the
non-mutated input and output values, while the dashed green lines show the values of the
two environmental optima. A: The mutations-to-phenotype mapping of an evolved network.
The distribution of outputs of node 1 produced by mutations is skewed but not bimodal. The
distribution of phenotypic values in node 2 instead is clearly bimodal, with two peaks
corresponding to the two optimal phenotypic values of the two environmental states.
Therefore, mutations on node 1 of an evolved network will preferentially produce adaptive
outcomes. In the evolved network we can see how node 1, although being the one sensitive
to mutations that cause the mutational transformer (see Figure 5C), does not create the
bimodal distribution of phenotypes. It instead skews the distribution of mutations. The
asymmetry in these outputs is then used in node 2 to create a bimodal distribution of
phenotypes. B: The mutations-to-phenotype mapping of a network for where the sensitive
locus (b1) is perturbed (adding the average mutation step = 0.1 to its evolved value). Node 1
still skews the distribution of outputs but towards slightly lower values. This causes the
creation of a bimodal distribution of outputs in node 2 but now with the two peaks inverted.
If before the main peak of the bimodal distribution sat on the environmental optimum value
of 0.5, now it sits on the other optimum value -0.5. At the same time, the smaller peak now
sits at 0.5 instead of -0.5. This shows that the architectures of these GRNs evolved to be able
to match the environmental optimum and, as well, rapidly switch to the other
environmental optimum via a single mutation.

                                                                                                             161
Discussion

First of all, we have demonstrated that even in a very simple model of a GRN
the genotype-to-phenotype map can evolve to facilitate rapid adaptation to
fluctuating environments. Even with such a simple genotype-to-phenotype
map consisting of just three loci, evolution can lead to a mapping, such that
adaptation to an environmental change occurs very fast and through a single
mutation. Building on the work of those who studied this phenomenon
before us (Crombach & Hogeweg, 2008; Cuypers et al., 2017), we term this
phenomenon a mutational transformer, where the phenotypic state rapidly
changes between alternative adaptive states through mutation.

Mutational transformers evolve in both GRNs with both linear and non-linear
gene interactions. Whilst both types of mutational transformers facilitate
rapid adaptation, the time to adaptation is shorter for non-linear GRNs. This
points to the fact that these two different types of GRN lead to the evolution
of mutational transformers that function through two distinct mechanisms.
Both mechanisms enhance the evolvability of GRNs. However, they do so in
two distinct ways.

Linear GRNs rapidly switch phenotype by amplifying the phenotypic effects
of small mutations on a specific locus. Thus, these GRNs evolve to reach a
relatively wide range of phenotypes through a single mutation; we term this
type of mechanism a mutation amplifier. A mutational amplifier increases
the amount of phenotypic variation that is created through mutation,
providing a wider range of phenotypic variance on which selection can act.
We show that the range of phenotypic variation is tuned to the specific
distance between the two adaptive phenotypes encountered during
evolution. Whilst the range of phenotypic variation is tuned, the phenotypes
generated through mutation are not biassed towards the particular adaptive
values. This also highlights a key drawback of mutation amplifiers; whilst they
accelerate evolution when a population is maladapted (not on a fitness
peak), they lead to the production of a lot of deleterious phenotypes when a
population is well adapted (on a fitness peak). These properties of mutation
amplifiers are reminiscent of results obtained by those studying the
evolution of mutation rates, here it has been shown that high mutation rates

162
are advantageous only when a population is maladapted (Sprouffske et al.,
2018).

On the other hand, non-linear GRNs (sigmoid transfer function) evolve a
more refined mutational transformer. In these GRNs, the distribution of
phenotypes generated through mutation is targeted towards the two
adaptive phenotypes encountered during evolution. The non-linear
interactions are essential to this strategy: they allow normally distributed
mutations to create a bimodal distribution of phenotypes. In other words,
the genotype-to-phenotype map evolves to canalise the effects of mutations
towards adaptive outcomes; we term this mechanism a mutation canaliser.
A mutational canaliser, biases variation towards particular adaptive
outcomes, shaping the way mutations affect fitness. This more refined
mechanism explains why non-linear GRNs adapt faster in response to a
change in environment than their linear counterparts. Interestingly the
mechanism behind the mutation canaliser seems to closely resemble the
phenomenon described by Crombach and Hogeweg (Crombach & Hogeweg,
2008), where the evolution of the genotype-to-phenotype map increased the
frequency of beneficial mutations.

When comparing the mutation amplifier and the mutation canaliser two key
differences are apparent. Since the mutation canaliser preferentially
produces adaptive outcomes it has a much lower production of deleterious
phenotypes when the population is well-adapted (on a fitness peak)
compared to the mutation amplifier. However, this lower production of
deleterious phenotypes comes at a cost: mutation canalisers are only
expected to enhance adaptation when environmental fluctuations are
repetitive (i.e. previous adaptive challenges are representative of future
adaptive challenges), whereas a mutation amplifier is also expected to
enhance adaptation in more irregularly fluctuating environments. In other
words, mutational amplifiers have a broader scope than mutational
canalisers (see also (Riederer et al., 2022)). Whilst above we compare and
contrast the two caricatures of the mutation amplifier and the mutation
canaliser, it is worth noting that in our opinion mutation amplification and
mutation canalization are not mutually exclusive, it is possible to amplify the
phenotypic effects of mutations whilst also somewhat biassing the effects of

                                                                                                             163
mutation towards particular adaptive outcomes. In our model the
environmental fluctuations are repetitive, switching between two different
adaptive values, therefore previous adaptive challenges are representative
of future adaptive challenges. It is clear that mutation amplifiers can enhance
adaptation in such repetitively fluctuating environments. However, given
that the phenotypic variation generated by a mutation amplifier is not
directed towards a particular phenotype, mutation amplifiers are also
expected to enhance adaptation in environments that fluctuate in a more
irregular manner.

We think that a mechanism similar to the mutational amplifier and the
mutational canaliser might be responsible for the pattern we observed in
some empirical examples described above, such as heteroresistance, yeast
thermal adaptation, and evolution of lactose metabolism. The rapid
switching to an adaptive phenotype using a single or very few mutational
steps closely resembles the behaviour of mutational transformers in our
model. In each of these three empirical cases it is very likely that populations
have previously repeatedly faced the relevant environmental change
(antibiotics presence/absence, different growth temperatures, loss of
lactose metabolising plasmid). Therefore we strongly suspect that in these
cases the structure of the underlying GRN is not a fluke, it is instead the
product of the evolution of evolvability, which has led to the creation of a
mutational transformer. Furthermore, the mutational canaliser is
reminiscent of many of the examples of developmental bias described in the
literature. Consider for example how the structure of the GRN shapes the
available variation in Bicyclus anynana (Allen, Beldade, Zwaan, & Brakefield,
2008), where the structure of the underlying GRN seems to favour the
production of particular phenotypic variants over others.

Our results are largely aligned with those obtained by Crombach and
Hogeweg (Crombach & Hogeweg, 2008), and Cuypers et al. (Cuypers et al.,
2017), who studied similar questions using a different set of models. Their
models used more complex GRNs and explicitly modelled a wide set of
biological mechanisms, aiming to more closely mimic biological complexity.
We instead set out to create a minimal model of a mutational transformer,
which allowed us to uncover in detail the evolution of the underlying

164
mechanisms. We have demonstrated the evolution of mutational
transformers across a wide range of different network architectures. It can
be concluded that a minimal complexity of two nodes (three loci) is required,
a network with a single node is not able to evolve a mutational transformer.
Surprisingly, complexity beyond two nodes does not seem to improve the
functioning (i.e. time to adaptation) of the mutational transformer. We
demonstrate that mechanisms that shape the effect of mutations on the
phenotype can readily evolve in very simple systems.

The fact that mutational transformers readily evolve in our extremely simple
GRN model leads us to expect they may be a rather widespread
phenomenon, in organisms facing fluctuating environments. Mutational
transformers might be especially prevalent when organisms face repetitively
fluctuating environments, where past adaptive challenges are likely to be
similar to future adaptive challenges. Future work should explore exactly if
and how mutational transformers can evolve under more diverse and
complex environmental regimes (e.g.: more than two alternating
environmental optima) or environments where the phenotype is
represented by more than one dimension). In a more general sense, our
results indicate that the genotype-to-phenotype map can easily evolve to
shape the phenotypic effects of mutation towards adaptive outcomes, even
with minimal complexity. This outcome seems to contradict the assumptions
of standard evolutionary theory, which assigns little relevance to the exact
nature of the genotype-to-phenotype map. However, recent work has shown
that explicitly considering the structure of the genotype-to-phenotype map
greatly influences the outcomes of evolutionary models (Milocco & Salazar-
Ciudad, 2020; van Gestel & Weissing, 2016). Our results are in line with these
findings, we demonstrate that even a simple model of a genotype-to-
phenotype map produces dynamics rarely observed in more classical models
i.e. the evolution of evolvability. All in all we show in detail how mutational
transformers evolve and function. We argue that mutational transformers
can greatly impact evolutionary dynamics and that their emergence
represents a clear example of the evolution of evolvability.

                                                                                                             165
Acknowledgements

We thank the members of the modelling adaptive response mechanisms
(MARM) group for their input. F.J.W., S.T., and T.J.B.v.E. acknowledge
funding from the European Research Council (ERC Advanced Grant No.
789240).

166
References

Allen, C. E., Beldade, P., Zwaan, B. J., & Brakefield, P. M. (2008). Differences
      in the selection response of serially repeated color pattern characters:
      Standing variation, development, and evolution. BMC Evolutionary
      Biology, 8(1), 1­13. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2148-8-94

Andersson, D. I., Nicoloff, H., & Hjort, K. (2019). Mechanisms and clinical
      relevance of bacterial heteroresistance. Nature Reviews Microbiology,
      17(8), 479­496. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579-019-0218-1

Band, V. I., & Weiss, D. S. (2019). Heteroresistance: A cause of unexplained
      antibiotic treatment failure? PLoS Pathogens, 15(6), 1­7.
      https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1007726

Crombach, A., & Hogeweg, P. (2008). Evolution of evolvability in gene
      regulatory networks. PLoS Computational Biology, 4(7), e1000112.
      https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000112

Cuypers, T. D., Rutten, J. P., & Hogeweg, P. (2017). Evolution of evolvability
      and phenotypic plasticity in virtual cells. BMC Evolutionary Biology,
      17(1), 60. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12862-017-0918-y

Greenbury, S. F., Louis, A. A., & Ahnert, S. E. (2022). The structure of
      genotype-phenotype maps makes fitness landscapes navigable.
      Nature Ecology and Evolution, 6(11), 1742­1752.
      https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-022-01867-z

Hjort, K., Nicoloff, H., & Andersson, D. I. (2016). Unstable tandem gene
      amplification generates heteroresistance (variation in resistance
      within a population) to colistin in Salmonella enterica. Molecular
      Microbiology, 102(2), 274­289. https://doi.org/10.1111/mmi.13459

Kokko, H., Chaturvedi, A., Croll, D., Fischer, M. C., Guillaume, F., Karrenberg,
      S., ... Stapley, J. (2017). Can Evolution Supply What Ecology Demands?
      Trends in Ecology and Evolution, 32(3), 187­197.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2016.12.005

                                                                                                             167
McGuigan, K., & Aw, E. (2017). How does mutation affect the distribution of
      phenotypes? Evolution, 71(10), 2445­2456.
      https://doi.org/10.1111/evo.13358

Metzgar, D., & Wills, C. (2000). Evidence for the adaptive evolution of
      mutation rates. Cell, 101(6), 581­584. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092-
      8674(00)80869-7

Milocco, L., & Salazar-Ciudad, I. (2020). Is evolution predictable?
      Quantitative genetics under complex genotype-phenotype maps.
      Evolution, 74(2), 230­244. https://doi.org/10.1111/evo.13907

Nicoloff, H., Hjort, K., Levin, B. R., & Andersson, D. I. (2019). The high
      prevalence of antibiotic heteroresistance in pathogenic bacteria is
      mainly caused by gene amplification. Nature Microbiology, 4(3), 504­
      514. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-018-0342-0

Pavlicev, M., & Hansen, T. F. (2011). Genotype-Phenotype Maps Maximizing
      Evolvability: Modularity Revisited. Evolutionary Biology, 38(4), 371­
      389. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11692-011-9136-5

Payne, J. L., & Wagner, A. (2019). The causes of evolvability and their
      evolution. Nature Reviews Genetics, 20(1), 24­38.
      https://doi.org/10.1038/s41576-018-0069-z

Pereira, C., Larsson, J., Hjort, K., Elf, J., & Andersson, D. I. (2021). The highly
      dynamic nature of bacterial heteroresistance impairs its clinical
      detection. Communications Biology, 4(1), 1­12.
      https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-021-02052-x

Pigliucci, M. (2008). Is evolvability evolvable? Nature Reviews Genetics, 9(1),
      75­82. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg2278

Riederer, J. M., Tiso, S., van Eldijk, T. J. B., & Weissing, F. J. (2022). Capturing
      the facets of evolvability in a mechanistic framework. Trends in
      Ecology and Evolution, 37(5), 430­439.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2022.01.004

168
Solopova, A., Bachmann, H., Teusink, B., Kok, J., Neves, A. R., & Kuipers, O.
      P. (2012). A specific mutation in the promoter region of the silent cel
      cluster accounts for the appearance of lactose-utilizing Lactococcus
      lactis MG1363. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 78(16),
      5612­5621. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.00455-12

Sprouffske, K., Aguílar-Rodríguez, J., Sniegowski, P., & Wagner, A. (2018).
      High mutation rates limit evolutionary adaptation in Escherichia coli.
      PLoS Genetics, 14(4), e1007324.
      https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1007324

Takeuchi, N., & Hogeweg, P. (2012). Evolutionary dynamics of RNA-like
      replicator systems: A bioinformatic approach to the origin of life.
      Physics of Life Reviews, 9(3), 219­263.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2012.06.001

Uller, T., Moczek, A. P., Watson, R. A., Brakefield, P. M., & Laland, K. N.
      (2018). Developmental bias and evolution: A regulatory network
      perspective. Genetics, 209(4), 949­966.
      https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.118.300995

van Gestel, J., & Weissing, F. J. (2016). Regulatory mechanisms link
      phenotypic plasticity to evolvability. Scientific Reports, 6(1), 24524.
      https://doi.org/10.1038/srep24524

Waddington, C. H. (1942). Canalization of development and the inheritance
      of acquired characters. Nature, 150(3811), 563­565.
      https://doi.org/10.1038/150563a0

Woods, R. J., Barrick, J. E., Cooper, T. F., Shrestha, U., Kauth, M. R., & Lenski,
      R. E. (2011). Second-order selection for evolvability in a large
      Escherichia coli population. Science (New York, N.Y.), 331(6023), 1433­
      1436. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1198914

Yona, A. H., Manor, Y. S., Herbst, R. H., Romano, G. H., Mitchell, A., Kupiec,
      M., ... Dahan, O. (2012). Chromosomal duplication is a transient
      evolutionary solution to stress. Proceedings of the National Academy
      of Sciences of the United States of America, 109(51), 21010­21015.
      https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1211150109

                                                                                                             169
170
            Chapter 6

                _______________________________________

The impact of plasmids on the de-
 novo evolution of ciprofloxacin
 resistance in Lactococcus lactis

Timo J.B. van Eldijk, Franz J. Weissing, Oscar P. Kuipers, G.
                        Sander van Doorn

                                         In preparation
                                                                                                            171
Abstract

Many relevant antibiotic-resistance genes are found on plasmids. Whilst
plasmids play an important role in the spread of antibiotic resistance, the
role that plasmids play in the de-novo development of resistance is less
well understood. However, it has been hypothesised that plasmids can
enhance evolvability and hence speed up the evolution of antibiotic
resistance. Here we use experimental evolution to study the impact of
plasmids on the de-novo evolution of ciprofloxacin resistance. As our
model system, we use Lactococcus lactis MG1363 and the pLP712 plasmid
which both do not contain any resistance genes at the start of the
experiment. Over the course of 31 days of experimental evolution, both
plasmid-free and plasmid-bearing populations managed to evolve high
levels of ciprofloxacin resistance. Plasmid-bearing strains did not evolve
resistance faster and their final resistance level was equal to that of their
plasmid-free counterparts. Hence, we did not find evidence that plasmids
enhance the rate of resistance evolution. Instead, we found evidence for
ciprofloxacin-dependent selection against the plasmid, as in populations
exposed to ciprofloxacin the plasmid frequency decreased drastically over
the course of the experiment. Using next-generation sequencing we also
found several new genes that may play a role in ciprofloxacin resistance.
These new genes provide potential new avenues to better understand
ciprofloxacin resistance. The finding that exposure to ciprofloxacin seems
to induce selection against plasmids could in the future be used to combat
plasmids encoding resistances to other antibiotics

Introduction

Antibiotic resistance represents a massive public health problem (WHO,
2014). To effectively combat antibiotic resistance, it is necessary to
understand the mechanisms underlying resistance. Here it seems that
plasmids play a crucial role: many clinically relevant antibiotic-resistance
genes are located on plasmids. Plasmids are small circular extrachromosomal
pieces of DNA that have their own origin of replication and can thus replicate
independently from the chromosome (Caratolli, 2011). Plasmids can be

172
horizontally transferred between bacterial cells through a process known as
conjugation, where a connection is formed between two cells through which
the plasmid is transferred. By recombination and transposable elements,
genes can move between the plasmid and the chromosome. Plasmids often
impose a fitness cost on the host bacterial cell (San Millan et al. 2017).
Infamous are so-called multi-resistance plasmids, such as those commonly
found in Staphylococcus aureus, where genes encoding resistances to
multiple antibiotics are located on a single plasmid (Shearer et al. 2011; Liu
et al. 2013; Dun et al. 2019; Hao et al. 2019). This is especially worrying since
plasmids can facilitate the spread of antibiotic resistance, both
geographically and across different bacterial species (Waters, 1999;
Rozwandowicz et al, 2018). It is clear that plasmids play an important role in
the spread of antibiotic resistance. However, before resistance can spread it
must first arise. The exact process of how resistance arises and how this
process may be impacted by plasmids is much less well understood. Here we
investigate the role of plasmids in the evolutionary process that transforms
a naïve bacterial population, harbouring plasmids without any resistance
genes into a resistant population harbouring plasmids containing resistance
genes.

So how might plasmids impact the de-novo evolution of antibiotic
resistance? It has been hypothesised that plasmids can enhance the
evolvability of bacteria, that is, the ability of bacteria to undergo adaptive
evolution (Ramsay & Firth 2017; Riederer et al. 2022). One key study showed
that a strain with resistance precursor genes located on a plasmid (and not
on the chromosome) was able to evolve resistance more quickly(San Millan
et al 2016). Since each cell had more than one copy of the plasmid, this
increased the mutational target size, making mutations conferring resistance
more probable. However, for the de-novo evolution of resistance this
mutational target size effect seems of somewhat limited relevance since it
requires precursor genes to already be located on a plasmid, which may not
always be the case.

There is an additional way in which plasmids might enhance bacterial
evolvability because some plasmids can facilitate horizontal gene transfer
between cells. Several hypotheses have been put forward as to how plasmid-

                                                                                                             173
based horizontal gene transfer might enhance evolvability. First of all,
horizontal gene transfer can recombine existing genetic variation, leading to
new combinations of genes (Hall & Kerney, 2012; Kingston et al., 2015). This
generation of new variation and evolutionary novelty can accelerate
adaptation, thus increasing evolvability. A second hypothesis concerns the
rate of spreading beneficial mutations in a population. If beneficial mutations
can spread through intercellular gene transfer (horizontally) as well as
through cell division (vertically) the rate of spread of beneficial genes is
accelerated, thereby increasing the rate of adaptation (Chu et al., 2018).
Third, horizontal gene transfer can create a reservoir of genetic variation.
This kind of reservoir dynamic also allows variation to be maintained that
would otherwise be lost. This maintenance of variation due to horizontal
gene transfer enhances evolvability (Croll & McDonald, 2012; Woods et al.,
2020; van Dijk, 2020). Fourth, plasmid-mediated horizontal gene transfer can
alleviate "clonal interference". In clonal interference different beneficial
mutations compete with one another because they occur in different asexual
lineages, and this competition can hinder adaptation (Gerish & Lenski, 1998).
Plasmid-mediated horizontal gene transfer allows for recombination
between different lineages, which can bring beneficial mutations together in
the same lineage, thereby preventing clonal interference and accelerating
adaptation (Cooper, 2007; Winkler & Kao, 2012). Whilst some theoretical
models underpin these different hypotheses (Gerish & Lenski, 1998; van Dijk,
2020), most hypotheses lack experimental verification. Furthermore, it is
unclear exactly under what conditions different evolvability-enhancing
mechanisms might operate: do plasmids always enhance evolvability or do
they only do so under a limited set of circumstances? All in all, mechanisms
by which plasmids might enhance evolvability are currently poorly
understood. Thus, experiments studying the impact of plasmids on
evolvability are clearly needed.

We aimed to uncover which role plasmids play in the de-novo evolution of
antibiotic resistance using experimental evolution. We experimentally
evolved resistance to ciprofloxacin in populations of Lactococcus lactis with
and without plasmids. We also evolved control populations in a medium
without ciprofloxacin. Previous experimental studies aiming to study the

174
impact of plasmids on resistance evolution have used engineered plasmids
of some sort. These plasmids already contain a particular resistance gene or
a resistance precursor gene. We take a different, more open-ended
approach, using a naturally occurring metabolic plasmid that does not carry
any known resistance precursor genes. Our model system aims to simulate a
situation in which a bacterium containing naturally occurring plasmids that
do not encode antibiotic resistance genes comes into contact with a new
antibiotic, as we hope to uncover the role that plasmids play in the de-novo
evolution of resistance.

We address two research questions. Do plasmids enhance evolvability in the
context of antibiotic resistance evolution? To this end, we compare the rate
of resistance evolution between plasmid-bearing and plasmid-free
populations. If as hypothesized plasmids enhance evolvability we would
expect resistance to evolve faster in plasmid-bearing populations. How do
plasmids influence the evolutionary trajectories that lead to resistance? To
address this question we use whole genome sequencing to investigate the
mutations that underpin ciprofloxacin resistance to see if the presence of a
plasmid impacts the evolutionary trajectories leading to resistance. If
plasmids enhance evolvability in the context of antibiotic resistance
evolution, then we might expect plasmids to impact the combination of
mutations underpinning resistance.

Material and methods

Strains & media

We choose to work with L. lactis since it is a well-studied model organism
that is safe to work with (generally regarded as safe), yet is relatively closely
related to Streptococcus pneumoniae, an important pathogen that has
acquired problematic resistance to ciprofloxacin (Sahm et al., 2000; Mrazek
et al. 2002; Wegeman et al. 2007; Patel et al. 2011), meaning that any new
insights gained into ciprofloxacin resistance in L. lactis are likely to be of some
clinical relevance. Another reason for using L. lactis concerns the fact that
plasmids seem to have played an important role in past adaptation of L. lactis
to the milk environment, meaning that there are many well-studied naturally

                                                                                                             175
occurring plasmids available (Wegeman et al. 2012; Tarazanova et al. 2016).
The plasmid we use, pLP712 is capable of high-frequency horizontal transfer
through conjugation and genetic exchange with the chromosome has also
been shown (Gasson, 1983; Wegeman et al. 2012; Tarazanova et al. 2016).
The pLP712 plasmids plays an important role in wild-type L. lactis, since it
carries genes that are essential for growing in milk (Wegeman et al. 2012;
Tarazanova et al. 2016).

In this experiment, we used two different L. lactis strains: As a plasmid-free
strain we used the plasmid-cured strain MG1363 (Gasson et al, 1983;
Wegeman et al. 2007; Linares et al. 2010;). Our plasmid-bearing strain was
created by transforming MG1363 with the pLP712 plasmid (Gasson et al,
1983; Wegeman et al. 2012; Tarazanova et al. 2016). These two strains
formed the starting point for our evolution experiment, they are henceforth
referred to as our two starting strains. Both strains were obtained from the
laboratory collection of the Molecular Genetics group at the University of
Groningen (The Netherlands). Using PCR, we tested both strains for the
presence/absence of the pLP712 plasmid and the presence of the sex factor
(see supplementary figure S1). The sex factor is a chromosomally integrated
mobile genetic element that contains the genes required for conjugation, the
presence of this element is necessary to allow for the conjugative transfer of
the pLP712 plasmid. The sex factor has also been shown to facilitate
chromosomal integration of the pLP712 plasmid (Gasson et al.1992;
Wegeman et al. 2012; Wels et al. 2019). We confirmed that our plasmid-
bearing strain contained both the sex factor and the pLP712 plasmid. Our
plasmid-free was shown to contain the sex factor, but indeed lacks the
pLP712 plasmid. Both strains were regrown from a single colony before
starting the experiment, to assure minimal standing genetic variation within
the two starting strains. All experiments were conducted in CDMPC medium
(Goel et al 2012; Solopova et al. 2017; Price et al. 2017). The treatment
culture medium was supplemented with ciprofloxacin (Sigma) dissolved in
0.1N HCl to achieve the following final concentrations over the course of the
evolution experiment: 2.5 ug/ml, 5 ug/ml, 10 ug/ml, 20 ug/ml/ 40 ug/ml, 80
ug/ml and 160 ug/ml. During the experiment cells were cultivated in 96-well
plates in a culture volume of 200ul, all cultures were incubated at 30 °C.

176
Determining initial resistance

Before starting the experiment, the initial resistance of both the plasmid-free
and the plasmid-bearing starting strain was determined. The strains were
grown in several concentrations of ciprofloxacin, whilst measuring the
optical density (OD600) of the strains in a plate reader (BMG Clariostar). The
following concentrations of ciprofloxacin were tested: 2.5 g/ml, 5 g/ml,
10 g/ml, 16 g/ml, 18 g/ml, 20 g/ml / 40 g/ml, 80 g/ml, and 160 g/ml.
As a control, the strains were also grown in medium without ciprofloxacin.
This experiment was repeated twice, both leading to the conclusion that no
growth occurred at a concentration of 10 ug/ml or higher. On the basis of
this data 2.5 ug/ml was chosen as the initial concentration to start the
evolution experiment, as this concentration was well below the inhibitory
concentration and hence still allowed for adequate growth. The data from
these experiments was also used to assess the growth rate of the two starting
strains (plasmid-free and plasmid-bearing) in medium without antibiotic and
in medium containing the sub-inhibitory concentration of ciprofloxacin (2.5
ug/ml). We used eight replicate growth curves per strain (obtained across
two days, four per treatment per day). Growth rates were estimated by
fitting a linear model to the exponential growth phase (OD600 between 0.05
and 0.3) of the log-transformed OD600 growth curve.

Experimental evolution protocol

The evolution experiment followed a sequential batch culture protocol, in
which a total of 32 populations were evolved, all originating from our two
starting strains. These 32 populations were spread across four different
treatments each with eight replicate populations: eight plasmid-free control
populations, eight plasmid-bearing control populations, eight plasmid-free
populations exposed to ciprofloxacin and eight plasmid-bearing populations
exposed to ciprofloxacin. The control populations served to control for any
adaptation to the medium that might occur throughout the experiment. To
start the experiment an overnight culture of the two starting strains was
prepared (in selective medium for the plasmid-bearing strain), subsequently
on day 0, 1 ul of this overnight culture was used to initialise the populations.
For all populations, the first transfer occurred on day 1 and in total the

                                                                                                             177
populations were transferred 31 times (until day 31). The control populations
were grown in medium without antibiotics and approximately every 24 hours
1ul of each population was transferred to 200ul of fresh medium, with the
first transfer occurring on day 1. The populations exposed to ciprofloxacin
were initialised using the overnight cultures and were initially grown in
medium containing 2.5 ug/ml on day 0. Subsequently, every 24 hours 1ul of
each population was transferred to two separate wells, one containing the
current ciprofloxacin concentration and one well containing twice the
current ciprofloxacin concentration. If after 24 hours the population had
managed to grow in the double concentration (i.e. Optical Density (OD600)
> 0.3) 1 ul of the double concentration well was used for transfer and the
double concentration then became the current ciprofloxacin concentration
of that population. If in 24 hours the population had not managed to grow in
the double concentration (i.e. OD600 < 0.3), the current concentration
remained unchanged and the well with the current concentration was used
for continued cultivation. In this way the population is always growing at the
highest concentration of ciprofloxacin to which it is resistant, therefore the
current concentration provides a measurement of the level of ciprofloxacin
resistance of a particular population. If the current concentration reached
the maximum concentration of 160 ug/ml the population was cultivated at
this maximum concentration for the remainder of the experiment. Every
third transfer as well as on the final day (day 31), a glycerol stock was
prepared from all the populations, with the first stock being made on day 3.
At the end of the experiment, all evolved populations were grown in CDMPC
medium without ciprofloxacin inside a plate reader (BMG Clariostar) to
determine their growth rate. This allowed us to assess the cost of evolving
resistance.

Resuscitation of failed populations

During the experiment some populations failed to grow after transfer, for
these populations the resuscitation protocol was initiated. The initiation of
resuscitation occurred a total of 10 times during the experiment. It occurred
both when the ciprofloxacin concentration had been increased (4 times) and
when the concentration had remained the same, with the latter likely due to

178
pipetting error (1 time in control populations, 5 times in populations exposed
to antibiotics). If a population (control or exposed to antibiotics) failed to
grow then the current concentration was halved (if applicable) and the
population was resuscitated using 1 ul of culture from the previous day
(inoculated 48 hours ago) using the old culture with the lowest ciprofloxacin
concentration available. This old culture was also turned into a glycerol stock.
For subsequent resuscitation attempts 1 ul of this glycerol stock was used,
each time halving the current concentration, this was continued until the
population managed to grow again in the current concentration. If during the
resuscitation process the population did not manage to grow at the lowest
concentration of 2.5 ug/ml a final attempt was made to resuscitate the
population at this concentration using 10 ul of the glycerol stock. On the final
day of the experiment (day 31) a single population failed to grow in both the
double and current concentration, but as the experiment ended,
resuscitation was not possible. For this population the glycerol stock made
on day 30 was used for all final analyses. A separate test was made after day
31 that confirmed that this population was able to grow in half the current
concentration, and hence this was denoted as the final resistance level for
this population.

Sequencing & analysis

For sequencing the evolved strains and the two starting strains were grown
overnight in CDMPC medium without ciprofloxacin. Subsequently, using 5 ml
of these overnight cultures, DNA was extracted using the gen elute bacterial
genomic DNA kit (Sigma), using the gram-positive protocol (including
incubation with lysozyme). Subsequently, the DNA was sequenced by
Eurofins on the Illumina platform, generating at least 5 million 150 bp paired
end-reads per sample. These reads were subsequently analysed in BRESEQ
(Detherage & Barrick, 2014) using the pLP712 reference genome (GenBank
FJ649478.1) and the MG1363 reference genome (GenBank AM406671.1) For
the MG1363 reference genome 71 insertion sequences were manually
annotated as mobile elements, with a version of the reference genome
containing these additional annotations kindly provided by A. M. Veenstra.
The BRESEQ analysis used the following filters: polymorphism bias cutoff =

                                                                                                             179
0.05, polymorphism minimum variant coverage = 10 and polymorphism total
variant coverage = 20. Using the GD tools available in BRESEQ the mutations
present in the starting strains were subtracted from those in the evolved
strains so that only those mutations that occurred during the experiment
could be analysed.

Results

Growth rates in the absence of the antibiotic
We compared the growth rates of our two starting strains (plasmid-free and
plasmid-bearing) in medium without the antibiotic. The growth rate was
estimated by fitting a linear model to the linear portion of the log-
transformed OD600 data; model fits are shown in supplementary figure S2.
The resulting growth rate estimates are plotted in Figure 1. In the absence of
the antibiotic, the plasmid-bearing strain has a significantly higher growth
rate than the plasmid-free strain (t-test, p =0.007), with the growth rate of
the plasmid-bearing strain being approximately 5% higher than that of the
plasmid-free strain. In other words, in the absence of the antibiotic having
this plasmid seems to increase the bacterial growth rate.

180
Figure 1. Growth rates of plasmid-free and plasmid-bearing strains in the absence of
ciprofloxacin. The growth rates of 8 populations of the plasmid-bearing and the plasmid-free
strain were estimated by the slope of the linear portion of the log-transformed OD600
trajectory (as shown in Supplementary Figure S2). Black lines show the mean value and the
boxes show the 95% confidence interval of the growth rate of the two strains. In the absence
of ciprofloxacin, the growth rate of the plasmid-bearing strain is significantly higher than that
of the plasmid-free strain (t-test, p =0.007).

                                                                                                             181
Growth rates in the presence of the antibiotic
Next, we assessed the growth rate of the two starting strains (plasmid-free
and plasmid-bearing) in medium containing a sub-inhibitory concentration of
ciprofloxacin (2.5 ug/ml). The model fits used to obtain these growth rate
estimates are shown in supplementary figure S3. The growth rate estimates
are plotted in Figure 2. At this sub-inhibitory concentration of ciprofloxacin
the plasmid-free strain has a significantly higher growth rate (t-test, p =
0.004), with the growth rate of the plasmid-free strain approximately 10%
higher than that of the plasmid-bearing strain. It thus seems that in this case
having a plasmid lowers the growth rate.

Figure 2. Growth rates of plasmid-free and plasmid-bearing strains in the presence of
ciprofloxacin. The growth rates of 8 populations of the plasmid-bearing and the plasmid-free
strain at a sub-inhibitory concentration of ciprofloxacin (2.5 ug/ml) were estimated by the
slope of the linear portion of the log-transformed OD600 trajectory (as shown in
Supplementary Figure S3). Black lines and boxes indicate the mean value and the 95%
confidence interval of the growth rate of the two strains. At this sub-inhibitory concentration
of ciprofloxacin the growth rate of the plasmid-free strain is significantly higher than that of
the plasmid-bearing strain (t-test, p =0.004).

182
Resistance trajectories during experimental evolution
Figure 3 shows the mean resistance trajectories of the eight plasmid-free and
the eight plasmid-bearing populations over the course of the evolution
experiment. First of all, both the plasmid-free and plasmid-bearing
populations manage to evolve high levels of resistance. Second, the final
resistance level of the plasmid-bearing populations lags behind that of the
plasmid-free populations. When it comes to the maximum level of resistance
two plasmid-free populations managed to reach this level by the end of the
experiment (160 ug/ml), whilst none of the plasmid-bearing populations
managed to reach this maximum. Figure 4 shows the log-transformed final
resistance level achieved in the populations exposed to ciprofloxacin. A t-test
comparing the mean final resistance level of the plasmid-bearing and the
plasmid-free populations indicated no significant difference (p=0.475). It
seems that the presence of the plasmid did not impact the final resistance
level evolved during the experiment.
Next, we assessed the rate of resistance evolution in each of the populations
exposed to ciprofloxacin. To this end, a linear model was fitted to the log-
transformed resistance trajectory of each population. The slope of this linear
model fit (slope of resistance increase) served as an indicator of the rate of
resistance evolution. For populations that showed a very drastic decrease in
resistance during resuscitation, only the trajectory before the decline was
used to fit the linear model. Model fits and resistance trajectories for
plasmid-fee and plasmid-bearing populations are shown in Supplementary
Figures S4 and S5, respectively. Figure 5 shows the resulting slopes of
resistance increase, obtained using these linear model fits. A t-test
comparing the mean slope of resistance between the plasmid-free and
plasmid-bearing populations did not produce a significant result (p=0.757).
In other words, there is no evidence that plasmids did impact the rate of
resistance evolution during the experiment.

                                                                                                             183
Figure 3. Average resistance trajectory of plasmid-free (red) and plasmid-bearing (blue)
populations. Mean ciprofloxacin resistance trajectories in ug/ml of the eight plasmid-free (in
red) and the eight plasmid-bearing populations (in blue) for each day of the experiment,
shown on a logarithmic scale. The error bars indicate the 95% confidence interval of the
resistance level.

184
Figure 4 Final resistance level achieved at the end of evolution. The logarithm of the final
resistance levels achieved in the different populations exposed to ciprofloxacin at the end of
the experiment (day 31). The left violin shows the plasmid-free populations and the right violin
shows the plasmid-bearing populations. Black lines indicate the mean, boxes indicate the 95%
confidence interval of the growth rate.

Figure 5. Rate of resistance increase over the course of evolution. The estimates of the rate
of increase are based on the linear model fits shown in supplementary figures S4 and S5. The
left violin shows the plasmid-free populations, the right violin shows the plasmid-bearing
populations. Black lines indicate the mean, boxes indicate the 95% confidence interval of the
slope.

                                                                                                             185
Sequencing results of evolved strains
Based on the sequencing results, the mutations that occurred during the
experiment in the evolved strains were analysed. Mutations were assessed
at the gene level, therefore multiple mutations in the same gene were
counted as a single mutation. Only mutations with an estimated within-
population frequency of 10% or above were included in the analysis.
First, we compared the number of mutations that occurred in the evolved
populations during the experiment, which is shown in Figure 6. It is evident
that more mutations occurred in populations evolving resistance to
ciprofloxacin, whilst the presence or absence of a plasmid did not influence
the number of mutations that occurred. This impression was confirmed by
using a Kruskal-Wallis test which revealed significant differences between
the treatments (p = 0.00005) (non-parametric tests were used as it concerns
count data). A post-hoc Dunn test did not find an indication for an effect of
the presence or absence of the plasmid (Control NP-Control P: p=0.828 and
Cipro NP-Cipro P: p=1.0). There was however a significant difference in the
number of mutations between those populations exposed to ciprofloxacin
and the control populations (Control NP-Cipro NP: p= 0.007, Control NP-Cipro
P: p= 0.001, Control P-Cipro NP: p= 0.010 , Control P-Cipro P: p= 0.002).

186
Figure 6. Number of mutations occurring during the evolution experiment. Mutations were
counted at the gene level and only mutations with a frequency of 10% or higher were included.
From left to right the following treatments are displayed: control plasmid-free, control
plasmid-bearing, ciprofloxacin exposed plasmid-free and ciprofloxacin exposed plasmid-
bearing. Populations exposed to ciprofloxacin displayed more mutations at the end of the
experiment. The presence or absence of the plasmid does not seem to impact the number of
mutations that occur for both the control and ciprofloxacin-exposed treatments. Black lines
indicate the median number of mutations, boxes indicate the interquartile range.

The mutation patterns associated with resistance in the strains exposed to
ciprofloxacin are shown in Figure 7. For this analysis, we only considered
mutations that occurred independently in at least two of the populations.
Mutations in the tgt gene that also frequently occurred in control
populations are also removed from the analysis, as they most likely represent
adaptation to the medium. These criteria ensure that the analysed mutations
are likely involved in modulating ciprofloxacin resistance. The frequencies of
different mutations are also plotted in supplementary figure S6

When examining Figure 7, it seems that the presence or absence of the
plasmid does not impact the patterns of mutation in the evolved strains.
Furthermore, we did not find any mutations in the pLP712 plasmid. However,

                                                                                                             187
several interesting observations can be made by examining the mutation
patterns of the chromosome. Mutations in the rpoB gene are most
commonly observed (in 8 out of 16 evolved populations), second most
commonly are mutations in the parC gene and the llmg_2080 gene (6/16)
and the rpoC gene (5/16). The rpoB and rpoC genes encode the  and the '
subunits of the RNA polymerase. Mutations in these genes occur in 13 out of
16 populations, interestingly it seems that either rpoB mutates or rpoC, these
mutations do not co-occur. Mutations in the llmg_2080 gene seem to be very
common; this mutation is of note since this gene is not traditionally
associated with ciprofloxacin resistance. Interestingly mutations in the
llmg_2080 gene do not co-occur with mutations in the rpoC gene, but they
do frequently co-occur with mutations in the rpoB gene. This observation
supports the aforementioned hypothesis that there are two separate
mutation pathways leading to resistance.
The genes traditionally associated with ciprofloxacin resistance are parC and
gyrA and to a lesser extent parE and gyrB (Lupien et al. 2013; Shariati et al.
2022). These genes produce the DNA topoisomerase IV and the DNA gyrase
enzymes, which are the direct targets to which ciprofloxacin binds.
Mutations in these genes do occur in several of the evolved populations
(parC: 5 out of 16, gyrA: 3 out of 16, parE: 2 out of 16 and gyrB: 3 out of 16).
However, these mutations are far from ubiquitous and they are not clearly
associated with a high level of resistance. The main observation that can be
made from the mutational patterns is that there seems to be a wide variety
of mutational patterns that lead to ciprofloxacin resistance. These patterns
seem to suggest that ciprofloxacin resistance depends on mutations in
multiple genes.

188
Figure 7. Visualisation of the mutation patterns that are associated with resistance. It shows
the occurrence of different mutations identified in the evolved populations exposed to
ciprofloxacin at the end of the evolution experiment. Mutations were analysed at the gene
level and only those with a within-population frequency of 10% were counted. Furthermore,
only mutations that occurred in two or more populations are included in this plot. Mutations
in the tgt gene that also frequently occurred in the control populations are also not included.
Plasmid-free populations are marked as NP, whilst plasmid-bearing populations are marked
as P. The numbers show the level of resistance each population managed to achieve. The
populations are sorted vertically based on the similarity of their mutation patterns (as
indicated by the dendrogram).

Finally, we used the sequencing results to assess the plasmid abundance in
the evolved plasmid-bearing populations. To estimate plasmid abundance,
we used the percentage of the total sequencing reads that mapped to the
plasmid, as reported by BRESEQ. As a baseline, we used the sequencing
results from the starting plasmid-bearing strain, which has been regrown (on
medium selecting for plasmid presence) from a single colony. When this
strain was sequenced, 3.1 % of sequencing reads mapped to the plasmid. In
the literature, the copy number of pLP712 is reported to be between 1-2

                                                                                                             189
copies per cell (Wegeman et al. 2012; Tarazanova et al. 2016). If we consider
the relative sizes of the MG1363 genome (2529478 bp) and the pLP712
plasmid (55395 bp), we arrive on the following: (55395/2529478) * 100 = 2.2
%. This would be the expected percentage of reads mapping to the plasmid
if each cell had a single plasmid. Therefore, if we then use this to estimate
the copy number per cell, we obtain 3.1%/2.2% = 1.4 copies per cell in the
starting plasmid-bearing strain.

Figure 8 shows the percentage of reads mapped to the plasmid for the
evolved plasmid-bearing populations. When examining this figure, it seems
that the control plasmid-bearing populations largely maintain the plasmid at
the same abundance as the starting strain. However, when we examine the
plasmid-bearing populations that were exposed to ciprofloxacin it is
immediately evident that most populations (6/8) clearly display a marked
decrease in plasmid abundance over the course of the experiment.
Interestingly, one of the ciprofloxacin-exposed populations completely lost
the plasmid from the population. Furthermore, another ciprofloxacin-
exposed population completely lost the sex factor that is necessary for
conjugation. To confirm these impressions we performed two one-sample
Wilcoxon tests, comparing the plasmid abundance at the start of the
experiment with the plasmid abundance in the evolved control populations
and the evolved ciprofloxacin-exposed populations. These tests showed
evidence of a change in plasmid frequency for the ciprofloxacin-exposed
populations (p= 0.04). For control populations this test did not provide any
evidence for a change in plasmid frequency (p= 0.844). A Wilcoxon test
comparing the difference in plasmid abundance between the control
populations and the ciprofloxacin-exposed populations did not yield a
significant result (p=0.105), but note the violation of the homoscedasticity
assumption.

190
Figure 8. Percentage of reads mapped to the plasmid in the evolved plasmid-bearing
populations. The percentage of reads mapped to the plasmid for the plasmid-bearing starting
strain is shown by a red line. It can be observed that most of the control populations maintain
the plasmid at about the same abundance as the starting strain. The populations exposed to
ciprofloxacin on the other hand showed a marked decrease in the plasmid abundance. Black
line shows the median, box shows the interquartile range.

Cost of resistance

Evolving resistance often comes at the cost of a lower growth rate in the
absence of the antibiotic. To assess this cost of evolving resistance and to see
if this cost differed between plasmid-free and plasmid-bearing populations,
we examined the growth rates of the evolved populations. The populations
were grown in medium without antibiotics and their growth curves (OD600)
were obtained. The growth rate was estimated by fitting a linear model to
the linear portion of the log-transformed OD600 data, model fits are shown
in supplementary figure S7. The resulting growth rates of the different
evolved populations are shown in Figure 9. A one-way ANOVA confirmed that
there were significant differences in growth rate between the different
treatments (p < 0.0001). A subsequent post-hoc Tukey test did not show any
indication that the presence or absence of the plasmid impacted the growth
rate of the evolved populations (Control NP-Control P: p=0.728 and Cipro NP-

                                                                                                             191
Cipro P: p=0.957). The fact that no difference in growth rate is detected here,
whilst such a difference was present in the starting strains, might be due to
the strong decrease in plasmid abundance in the plasmid-bearing
populations exposed to ciprofloxacin. Whether a population evolved in the
presence of ciprofloxacin did significantly impact the growth rate in the
absence of antibiotic (Control NP-Cipro NP, Control NP-Cipro P, Control P-
Cipro NP and Control P-Cipro P: for all cases p < 0.00001). The populations
that evolved ciprofloxacin resistance had a lower growth rate when
cultivated in the absence of this antibiotic when compared to the control. In
other words, it seems that evolving ciprofloxacin resistance comes at the cost
of a lower growth rate in the absence of this antibiotic.

Figure 9. The growth rates of the evolved populations measured in the absence of
antibiotics. The following treatments are displayed (left to right): ciprofloxacin exposed
plasmid-free (Cipro NP), ciprofloxacin exposed plasmid-bearing (Cipro P), control plasmid-free
(Control NP), control plasmid-bearing (Control P). The black lines indicate the mean, the boxes
the 95% confidence interval.

192
Discussion

Over the course of the evolution experiment the populations manage to
rapidly evolve ciprofloxacin resistance. Before discussing the results in detail,
it is important to emphasise that our experiment is not aiming to understand
the role that plasmids play in the spread of antibiotic resistance, a process
that has already been studied extensively. We are interested to see the
impact that plasmids play in the development of resistance. Hence, we use a
plasmid and a bacterial strain that both do not have any resistance genes at
the start of the experiment. Our experimental evolution approach allows us
to examine, from several different angles, the role that plasmids play in this
de-novo evolution of ciprofloxacin resistance.

Considering all the outcomes of our experiment, we did not find any evidence
that the presence of the plasmid enhanced evolvability in the context of
antibiotic resistance. The presence of a plasmid does not seem to result in a
significantly higher final evolved resistance level at the end of the
experiment. Furthermore, when we analysed the slope of the increase in
resistance during the experiment, this was also not significantly impacted by
the presence of the plasmid. If anything, it seems that the presence of the
plasmid might be detrimental when evolving resistance: we observed strong
selection against the plasmid in populations exposed to ciprofloxacin. This is
evidenced by the strong decrease in plasmid frequencies in populations
exposed to ciprofloxacin, whilst plasmid frequencies remained stable in the
control populations.

Whole genome sequencing revealed that the plasmid also did not influence
the mutational patterns that underly ciprofloxacin resistance. This result
might provide some explanation as to why the hypothesised effect of
plasmids on evolvability was not observed. The hypothesised evolvability
impact of a plasmid would involve bringing together resistance genes from
different clonal lineages into a single lineage. In our experiment, this would
likely involve the transfer of genes between the chromosome and the
plasmid, which we did not observe. Perhaps the timescale of our experiment
may have been too short for such relatively rare mutational events to occur.
Furthermore, we only evolved resistance to a single antibiotic, perhaps a

                                                                                                             193
plasmid would enhance evolvability in a more complex selective
environment. Regardless, contrary to our initial hypothesis, it seems that in
the current experiment the presence of the pLP712 plasmid did not enhance
evolvability in the de-novo evolution of ciprofloxacin resistance in L. lactis.

As highlighted before, in the plasmid-bearing populations that evolve
ciprofloxacin resistance the frequency of the plasmid in the populations
strongly decreases, with one of the populations even losing the plasmid
entirely. It appears that there is strong selection against the plasmid when
populations are exposed to ciprofloxacin. On the other hand, when
populations are grown without ciprofloxacin (control) it seems that there is
no selection against the plasmid. It seems that the plasmid is only costly in
the presence of ciprofloxacin. This conditional cost of the plasmid also comes
to light when we examine the growth of the plasmid-free and plasmid-
bearing starting strains, from which the evolved populations were created.
In the absence of antibiotic, the plasmid-bearing strain has a faster growth
rate than the plasmid-free strain. However, when both strains are exposed
to a sub-inhibitory concentration of ciprofloxacin the plasmid-bearing strain
grows slower than the plasmid-free strain Somehow the growth rate of the
plasmid-bearing strain is disproportionately affected by the presence of
ciprofloxacin. This could explain the lower baseline level of resistance and
the strong selection against the plasmid observed in the plasmid-bearing
populations exposed to ciprofloxacin.

To further explain why the plasmid is only costly in the presence of
ciprofloxacin it is necessary to examine the mechanism of action of this
antibiotic. Ciprofloxacin works by inhibiting the DNA topoisomerase IV and
the DNA gyrase enzymes, which serve to release mechanical stress on the
DNA during replication and transcription. When these enzymes are poisoned
by ciprofloxacin they bind to the DNA and then are unable to disassociate,
this blocks DNA synthesis and causes double-stranded DNA breaks (Lupien et
al. 2013; Oijkic et al., 2020; Shariati et al. 2022). We hypothesise that, under
normal circumstances, the replication rate of cells is not limited by the
presence of enough DNA topoisomerase IV and DNA gyrase or the stability
of replication forks and hence the plasmid is not costly. However, in the
presence of ciprofloxacin these factors limit the rate of replication. As

194
functioning DNA topoisomerase IV and DNA gyrase are scarce and replication
forks are unstable, maintaining and replicating (which requires the formation
of an extra replication fork) extra DNA in the form of a plasmid suddenly
becomes very costly to a host cell.

We also made some interesting observations regarding the mutational
patterns underlying ciprofloxacin resistance in L. lactis. To our knowledge,
these mutation patterns have not been described before, while they may be
especially relevant since L. lactis is closely related to S. pneumoniae, a
pathogen that has acquired problematic resistance to ciprofloxacin (Sahm et
al., 2000; Mrazek et al. 2002; Wegeman et al. 2007; Patel et al. 2011). The
classic mutations associated with ciprofloxacin resistance in S. pneumoniae
and many other bacteria are in the parC and gyrA genes and to a lesser extent
gyrB and parE which encode the DNA gyrase and topoisomerase IV enzymes
(Lupien et al. 2013; Oijkic et al., 2020; Shariati et al. 2022). These mutations
also occur in some of our evolved populations, with 11 out of 16 populations
having a mutation in one of these four genes. The three populations that
evolved a very high level of resistance (80 ug/ml or higher), all have a parC
mutation. However, these mutations do not occur in all our populations and
some populations manage to reach quite high levels of resistance (40 ug/ml)
without mutating any of these genes.

The most commonly observed mutations in the evolved populations are in
the rpoB or rpoC genes (13/16 populations), which encode subunits of the
RNA polymerase. In Escherichia coli it has been described that rpoB
mutations can lead to ciprofloxacin resistance, by upregulating mdtK
dependent antibiotic efflux (Pietsch et al. 2016; Brandis et al, 2021). Based
on the high frequency of rpoB and rpoC mutations we suspect a similar
mechanism might be operating in L. lactis. RpoB and rpoC mutations do not
seem to co-occur. This could be due to chance, but it tentatively suggests
that there might be two separate mutational paths that can lead to
resistance, were either the  or the ' subunit of the RNA polymerase
mutates. Another frequently occurring mutation are mutations in the
llmg_2280 gene (6/16 populations), this mutation did cooccur with
mutations in the rpoB gene but never with mutations in the rpoC gene. The
llmg_2280 gene encodes a small 69 amino acid long protein of the YozE

                                                                                                             195
family (NCBI Reference Sequence: WP_011677077). Similar proteins have
been described from Staphylococcus aureus and Bacillus subtillis and these
proteins may have a function that involves binding to RNA (Swapna et al.
2012). Based on our results llmg_2280 represents an interesting new
candidate gene that clearly plays a role in ciprofloxacin resistance in L. lactis.
Future studies should aim to investigate the possibility that YozE family
proteins play a role in ciprofloxacin resistance in other bacterial species.

Another interesting group of mutations involves mutations in the sugE gene
(2/16) and its adjacent intergenic region (4/16). The sugE gene encodes a
protein from the small drug-resistance protein family, many proteins of this
family are known to be involved in antibiotic efflux (Bay et al. 2008; He et al.
2011). SugE has been associated with resistance to several antimicrobials,
but experiments have not previously linked it to ciprofloxacin resistance or
resistance to other fluoroquinolones (Chung & Saier 2002; He et al. 2011).
Some populations (3/16) also had mutations in the recD gene, which encodes
for a protein involved in the repair of double stranded DNA breaks
(Dillingham et al. 2008). In summary when considering the mutation patterns
that lead to ciprofloxacin resistance L. lactis it becomes clear that resistance
is a highly multigenic phenotype. Many different mutations interact to create
ciprofloxacin resistance and the underlying mechanisms are likely quite
diverse; involving target modifications (parC, gyrA, gyrB, parE), antibiotic
efflux (rpoB, rpoC, sugE) and perhaps even other mechanisms (recD,
llmg_2280). Our results also indicate that in L. lactis ciprofloxacin resistance
is a costly phenotype: the populations that evolved resistance had a lower
growth rate compared to the control populations strains when grown in the
absence of ciprofloxacin (see figure 9).

All in all, we did not find any support for our initial hypothesis that plasmids
enhance evolvability in the context of antibiotic resistance. We also did not
observe any impact of plasmid the mutational patterns that underly
ciprofloxacin resistance. Nonetheless, our evolution experiment enabled us
to make several new observations. First of all, we showed that the pLP712
plasmid was only costly in the presence of ciprofloxacin. This raises the
interesting possibility of using ciprofloxacin to create selection against
certain plasmids. Perhaps ciprofloxacin could be used to rid pathogen

196
populations of plasmids containing resistances to other antibiotics. We are
also the first to describe the mutation patterns in L. lactis that lead to
ciprofloxacin resistance. We show that there are several different mutational
paths that can lead to resistance, which go beyond the parC and gyrA
mutations typically considered. Our results tentatively suggest that
ciprofloxacin resistance is a highly multigenic phenotype involving several
different mutations. Finally, we also identify llmg_2208 and by association
other YozE family genes, as new genes of interest that may play a role in
ciprofloxacin resistance.

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank Harma Karsens for her help, especially her
expertise regarding strain selection and PCR-primer design. We also thank
Marjon de Vos for her advice regarding the experimental setup and her
support in securing funding. We also thank the members of the modelling
adaptive response mechanisms (MARM) group for their input. F.J.W. and
T.J.B.v.E. acknowledge funding from the European Research Council (ERC
Advanced Grant No. 789240). T.J.B.v.E also wishes to acknowledge funding
from the Gratama-foundation (projectnr. 2022-11), without which this
project would not have been possible.

                                                                                                             197
References

Bay, D. C., Rommens, K. L., & Turner, R. J. (2008). Small multidrug resistance
proteins: a multidrug transporter family that continues to grow. Biochimica
et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-Biomembranes, 1778(9), 1814-1838.

Brockhurst, M. A., & Harrison, E. (2022). Ecological and evolutionary
solutions to the plasmid paradox. Trends in Microbiology, 30(6), 534-543.

Brandis, G., Granström, S., Leber, A. T., Bartke, K., Garoff, L., Cao, S., ... &
Hughes, D. (2021). Mutant RNA polymerase can reduce susceptibility to
antibiotics via ppGpp-independent induction of a stringent-like
response. Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, 76(3), 606-615.

Carattoli, A. (2011). Plasmids in Gram negatives: molecular typing of
resistance plasmids. International journal of medical microbiology, 301(8),
654-658.

Chu, H. Y., Sprouffske, K., & Wagner, A. (2018). Assessing the benefits of
horizontal gene transfer by laboratory evolution and genome
sequencing. BMC evolutionary biology, 18, 1-21.

Chung, Y. J., & Saier Jr, M. H. (2002). Overexpression of the Escherichia coli
sugE gene confers resistance to a narrow range of quaternary ammonium
compounds. Journal of bacteriology, 184(9), 2543-2545.

Cooper, T. F. (2007). Recombination speeds adaptation by reducing
competition between beneficial mutations in populations of Escherichia
coli. PLoS biology, 5(9), e225.

Croll, D., & McDonald, B. A. (2012). The accessory genome as a cradle for
adaptive evolution in pathogens. PLoS pathogens, 8(4), e1002608.

Deatherage, D.E., Barrick, J.E. (2014) Identification of mutations in
laboratory-evolved microbes from next-generation sequencing data using
breseq. Methods Mol. Biol. 1151: 165­188.

Dillingham, M. S., & Kowalczykowski, S. C. (2008). RecBCD enzyme and the
repair of double-stranded DNA breaks. Microbiology and Molecular Biology
Reviews, 72(4), 642-671.

198
Dunn, S. J., Connor, C., & McNally, A. (2019). The evolution and
transmission of multi-drug resistant Escherichia coli and Klebsiella
pneumoniae: the complexity of clones and plasmids. Current opinion in
microbiology, 51, 51-56.
Gasson, M. J. (1983). Plasmid complements of Streptococcus lactis NCDO
712 and other lactic streptococci after protoplast-induced curing. Journal of
bacteriology, 154(1), 1-9.
Gasson, M. J., Swindell, S., Maeda, S., & Dodd, H. M. (1992). Molecular
rearrangement of lactose plasmid DNA associated with high-frequency
transfer and cell aggregation in Lactococcus Iactis 712. Molecular
microbiology, 6(21), 3213-3223.
Ghaly, T. M., & Gillings, M. R. (2022). New perspectives on mobile genetic
elements: a paradigm shift for managing the antibiotic resistance
crisis. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 377(1842),
20200462.
Gerrish, P. J., & Lenski, R. E. (1998). The fate of competing beneficial
mutations in an asexual population. Genetica, 102, 127-144.
Goel, A., Santos, F., de Vos, W. M., Teusink, B., & Molenaar, D. (2012).
Standardized assay medium to measure Lactococcus lactis enzyme activities
while mimicking intracellular conditions. Applied and environmental
microbiology, 78(1), 134-143.
Hao, W., Shan, X., Li, D., Schwarz, S., Zhang, S. M., Li, X. S., & Du, X. D.
(2019). Analysis of a poxtA-and optrA-co-carrying conjugative
multiresistance plasmid from Enterococcus faecalis. Journal of Antimicrobial
Chemotherapy, 74(7), 1771-1775.
Hall, B. K., & Kerney, R. (2012). Levels of biological organization and the
origin of novelty. Journal of Experimental Zoology Part B: Molecular and
Developmental Evolution, 318(6), 428-437.

                                                                                                             199
He, G. X., Zhang, C., Crow, R. R., Thorpe, C., Chen, H., Kumar, S., ... & Varela,
M. F. (2011). SugE, a new member of the SMR family of transporters,
contributes to antimicrobial resistance in Enterobacter
cloacae. Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy, 55(8), 3954-3957.

Linares, D. M., Kok, J., & Poolman, B. (2010). Genome sequences of
Lactococcus lactis MG1363 (revised) and NZ9000 and comparative
physiological studies. Journal of bacteriology, 192(21), 5806-5812.

Liu, M. A., Kwong, S. M., Jensen, S. O., Brzoska, A. J., & Firth, N. (2013).
Biology of the staphylococcal conjugative multiresistance plasmid
pSK41. Plasmid, 70(1), 42-51.

Lupien, A., Billal, D. S., Fani, F., Soualhine, H., Zhanel, G. G., Leprohon, P., &
Ouellette, M. (2013). Genomic characterization of ciprofloxacin resistance
in a laboratory-derived mutant and a clinical isolate of Streptococcus
pneumoniae. Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy, 57(10), 4911-4919.

Mrázek, J., Gaynon, L. H., & Karlin, S. (2002). Frequent oligonucleotide
motifs in genomes of three streptococci. Nucleic acids research, 30(19),
4216-4221.

Ojkic, N., Lilja, E., Direito, S., Dawson, A., Allen, R. J., & Waclaw, B. (2020). A
roadblock-and-kill mechanism of action model for the DNA-targeting
antibiotic ciprofloxacin. Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy, 64(9), 10-
1128.

Patel, S. N., McGeer, A., Melano, R., Tyrrell, G. J., Green, K., Pillai, D. R., ... &
Canadian Bacterial Surveillance Network. (2011). Susceptibility of
Streptococcus pneumoniae to fluoroquinolones in Canada. Antimicrobial
agents and chemotherapy, 55(8), 3703-3708.

Pietsch, F., Bergman, J. M., Brandis, G., Marcusson, L. L., Zorzet, A., Huseby,
D. L., & Hughes, D. (2016). Ciprofloxacin selects for RNA polymerase
mutations with pleiotropic antibiotic resistance effects. Journal of
Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, 72(1), 75-84.

Price, C. E., dos Santos, F. B., Hesseling, A., Uusitalo, J. J., Bachmann, H.,
Benavente, V., ... & Kuipers, O. P. (2017). Glucose limitation in Lactococcus

200
shapes a single-peaked fitness landscape exposing membrane occupancy as
a constraint. bioRxiv, 147926.

Ramsay, J. P., & Firth, N. (2017). Diverse mobilization strategies facilitate
transfer of non-conjugative mobile genetic elements. Current opinion in
microbiology, 38, 1-9.

Riederer, J. M., Tiso, S., van Eldijk, T. J., & Weissing, F. J. (2022). Capturing
the facets of evolvability in a mechanistic framework. Trends in Ecology &
Evolution, 37(5), 430-439.

Rozwandowicz, M., Brouwer, M. S. M., Fischer, J., Wagenaar, J. A.,
Gonzalez-Zorn, B., Guerra, B., ... & Hordijk, J. (2018). Plasmids carrying
antimicrobial resistance genes in Enterobacteriaceae. Journal of
Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, 73(5), 1121-1137.

Sahm, D. F., Peterson, D. E., Critchley, I. A., & Thornsberry, C. (2000).
Analysis of ciprofloxacin activity against Streptococcus pneumoniae after 10
years of use in the United States. Antimicrobial agents and
chemotherapy, 44(9), 2521-2524.

San Millan, A., Escudero, J. A., Gifford, D. R., Mazel, D., & MacLean, R. C.
(2016). Multicopy plasmids potentiate the evolution of antibiotic resistance
in bacteria. Nature ecology & evolution, 1(1), 0010.

San Millan, A., & MacLean, R. C. (2017). Fitness costs of plasmids: a limit to
plasmid transmission. Microbiology spectrum, 5(5), 10-1128.

Shearer, J. E., Wireman, J., Hostetler, J., Forberger, H., Borman, J., Gill, J., ...
& Summers, A. O. (2011). Major families of multiresistant plasmids from
geographically and epidemiologically diverse staphylococci. G3: Genes|
Genomes| Genetics, 1(7), 581-591.

Shariati, A., Arshadi, M., Khosrojerdi, M. A., Abedinzadeh, M., Ganjalishahi,
M., Maleki, A., ... & Khoshnood, S. (2022). The resistance mechanisms of
bacteria against ciprofloxacin and new approaches for enhancing the
efficacy of this antibiotic. Frontiers in Public Health, 10, 1025633.

Solopova, A., Bachmann, H., Teusink, B., Kok, J., Neves, A. R., & Kuipers, O.
P. (2012). A specific mutation in the promoter region of the silent cel cluster

                                                                                                             201
accounts for the appearance of lactose-utilizing Lactococcus lactis
MG1363. Applied and environmental microbiology, 78(16), 5612-5621.

Swapna, G. V. T., Rossi, P., Montelione, A. F., Benach, J., Yu, B., Abashidze,
M., ... & Montelione, G. T. (2012). Three structural representatives of the
PF06855 protein domain family from Staphyloccocus aureus and Bacillus
subtilis have SAM domain-like folds and different functions. Journal of
structural and functional genomics, 13, 163-170.

Tarazanova, M., Beerthuyzen, M., Siezen, R., Fernandez-Gutierrez, M. M.,
De Jong, A., Van Der Meulen, S., ... & Bachmann, H. (2016). Plasmid
complement of Lactococcus lactis NCDO712 reveals a novel pilus gene
cluster. PLoS One, 11(12), e0167970.

Van Dijk, B., Hogeweg, P., Doekes, H. M., & Takeuchi, N. (2020). Slightly
beneficial genes are retained by bacteria evolving DNA uptake despite
selfish elements. Elife, 9, e56801.

Waters, V. L. (1999). Conjugative transfer in the dissemination of beta-
lactam and aminoglycoside resistance. Frontiers in Bioscience: a Journal and
Virtual Library, 4, D433-56.

Wels, M., Siezen, R., Van Hijum, S., Kelly, W. J., & Bachmann, H. (2019).
Comparative genome analysis of Lactococcus lactis indicates niche
adaptation and resolves genotype/phenotype disparity. Frontiers in
microbiology, 10, 4.

Wegmann, U., O'Connell-Motherway, M., Zomer, A., Buist, G., Shearman,
C., Canchaya, C., ... & Kok, J. (2007). Complete genome sequence of the
prototype lactic acid bacterium Lactococcus lactis subsp. cremoris
MG1363. Journal of bacteriology, 189(8), 3256-3270.

Wegmann, U., Overweg, K., Jeanson, S., Gasson, M., & Shearman, C. (2012).
Molecular characterization and structural instability of the industrially
important composite metabolic plasmid pLP712. Microbiology, 158(12),
2936-2945.

Winkler, J., & Kao, K. C. (2012). Harnessing recombination to speed adaptive
evolution in Escherichia coli. Metabolic engineering, 14(5), 487-495.

202
Woods, L. C., Gorrell, R. J., Taylor, F., Connallon, T., Kwok, T., & McDonald,
M. J. (2020). Horizontal gene transfer potentiates adaptation by reducing
selective constraints on the spread of genetic variation. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 117(43), 26868-26875.
World Health Organization. (2014). Antimicrobial resistance: global report
on surveillance. World Health Organization.

                                                                                                             203
      Supplementary material

PCR for pLP712 and Sex factor
PCR reactions were performed using a standard colony PCR protocol. To
create a template 200 ul of glycerol stock of each strain was centrifuged and
the pellet was resuspended in 25ul miliq water, 0.6ul of template was added
to each reaction. For all PCR reactions an annealing temperature of 50 °C was
used together with an extension time of 120 seconds, the reaction was run
for 30 cycles.
To test for the presence of pLP712 the following primers based on the PrtM
gene were used, which resulted in a 860bp product:
prtM_Forward: CGCCTTAAAGTATTATTGGC
prtM_Reverse: TAACTATCTAGCGCATCCGC
To test for the presence of the sex factor genes (required for conjugation)
the following primers based on the TraD gene were used, which resulted in
a 794 bp product.
traD_Forward: GAATATTATGCAGCTCAATGCC
traD-Reverse: CAATCTTACCAATATTGGCG

204
Figure S1 Electrophoresis gel showing PCR results to test for the presence of the
pLP712 plasmid (PrtM) and the sex factor (TraD) (required for conjugation). NC
stands for negative control, 1363 indicates strain MG1363 (plasmid-free strain in the
experiment), 1299 indicates strain MG1299 (which is know to contain pLP712, but
lacks the sex factor genes), 1363+pLP712 indicates strain MG1363 transformed with
the pLP712 plasmid (plasmid-bearing strain in the experiment). 1 Kb gene ruler was
included in the electrophoresis to verify fragment size, showing the PCR products
match expected sizes (PrtM: 860bp, TraD: 794bp).

                                                                                                             205
Linear model fits for growth rate estimations of starting strains

Figure S2. Linear model fits on log-transformed OD600 growth curve data, used to estimate
growth rates for the two starting strains in the absence of antibiotic.

Figure S3. Linear model fits on log-transformed OD600 growth curve data, used to estimate
growth rates for the two starting strains at a sub-inhibitory concentration of ciprofloxacin (2.5
ug/ml).
206
Resistance trajectories for populations exposed to ciprofloxacin

Figure S4 This figure shows the log-transformed resistance levels of each of the individual
plasmid-free populations exposed to ciprofloxacin. For each population a linear model-fit is
shown, the slope of this model fit served as an indicator of the rate of resistance evolution.
For populations that showed a drastic decline in resistance (due to resuscitation), only the
trajectory before the decline was used to fit the linear model. Points used to fit the linear

model are plotted in red, excluded points are plotted in black.

                                                                                                             207
Figure S5 This figure shows the log-transformed resistance levels of each of the individual
plasmid-bearing populations exposed to ciprofloxacin. For each population a linear model-fit
is shown, the slope of this model fit served as an indicator of the rate of resistance evolution
(figure 5 in main text). For populations that showed a drastic decline in resistance (due to
resuscitation), only the trajectory before the decline was used to fit the linear model. Points
used to fit the linear model are plotted in blue, excluded points are plotted in black.

208
Frequencies of mutations in populations exposed to
ciprofloxacin

Figure S6 This figure shows the frequency of different mutations identified in the evolved
populations exposed to ciprofloxacin at the end of the evolution experiment. Mutations were
analysed at the gene level and only those with a within population frequency of 10% were
counted. Furthermore, only mutations that occurred in two or more populations are included
in this plot.

                                                                                                             209
Linear model fits for growth rate estimations of evolved strains

Figure S7 Linear model fits on log-transformed OD600 growth curve data (a single growth
curve per evolved population), used to estimate growth rates in the absence of antibiotic for
the evolved populations. Plasmid-free control populations are shown in black, plasmid-
bearing control populations are shown in red, plasmid-free populations exposed to
ciprofloxacin are shown in green and plasmid-bearing populations exposed to ciprofloxacin
are shown in blue.

210
            Chapter 7

                _______________________________________

 Uniting community ecology and
evolutionary rescue: Community-

            Wide Rescue

Timo J.B. van Eldijk, Karen Bisschop and Rampal S. Etienne

          Published (2020) in Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution, 8, 552268
                                                                                                            211
Abstract

Most ecological communities are facing changing environments,
particularly due to global climate change. When migration is impossible,
adaptation to these altered environments is necessary to survive. Yet, we
have little theoretical understanding how ecological communities respond
both ecologically and evolutionarily to such environmental change. Here
we introduce a simple eco-evolutionary model, the Community-Wide
Rescue (CWR) model, in which a community faces environmental
deterioration and each species within the community is forced to undergo
adaptation or become extinct. We assume that all species in the community
are equivalent except for their initial abundance. This individual-based
simulation model thus combines community ecology and evolutionary
rescue theory. We show that under Community-Wide Rescue a rapid loss
of rare species occurs. This loss occurs because rare species face
competition and a limited supply of mutations. The rapid loss of rare
species provides a testable prediction regarding the impact of Community-
Wide Rescue on species abundance distributions in ecological
communities.

Introduction

Many ecosystems face abrupt human-induced environmental change and
evolutionary adaptation might be the only way to avoid extinction when
migration is difficult (Vitousek et al. 1997, IPCC 2014). Understanding
precisely how ecological communities respond to abruptly changing
environments is therefore paramount. This calls for models that predict how
an ecological community composed of many different species adapts to such
a deteriorated environment (Hoffman and Sgró, 2011). Such models of
community-wide adaptation are not only relevant from the perspective of
global change, but they are also important to understand the response of any
community to environmental change, such as the microbiome of a medical
patient undergoing a prolonged treatment with antibiotics. In this case, not
just a single pathogenic bacterium faces a changed environment, but a
complex community consisting of many thousands of species (Arumugam et
al. 2011, Cho and Blaser 2012), must adapt to avoid extinction. Whilst many

212
models exist that study how a population of a single species, or a community
composed two species, adapts to environmental change (Hoffman and Sgrò,
2011, Martin et al. 2013, Osmond & De Mazancourt 2013, Northfield & Ives
2013 , Cortez & Yamamichi 2019), fewer models exist that describe the
response of an entire community composed of a multitude species to an
altered environment, though there are some examples (De Mazancourt et al.
2008, Bell 2017, Lasky 2019). Furthermore, empirical results, describing
community wide adaptation, such as those presented by Low-Décarie et al.
(2015), Bell et al. (2019) and Roodgar et al. (2019), are clearly calling for such
models.

Evolutionary rescue theory models situations in which a population can only
escape extinction if it adapts. In a classical evolutionary rescue scenario,
where the environment in which a population resides deteriorates, the
population starts declining as a result. Extinction can then only be averted if
a mutant establishes that has a positive growth rate in the new environment;
i.e. the population is rescued. This process results in the well-known U-
shaped curve of population size over time (Gomulkiewicz & Holt 1995,
Gonzalez et al. 2012, Orr and Unckless 2014). Most models of evolutionary
rescue focus on deriving the probability of the occurrence of such a rescue
event given a certain initial population size, a rate of population decline, and
a mutation rate. Evolutionary rescue theory could even be a useful tool to
predict the emergence of antibiotic resistance (Martin et al. 2013; Alexander
et al. 2014).

Here, we explore a new scenario in which not a single population, but a whole
community composed of many different species faces a deteriorated
environment, causing the populations of each species to decline. Only those
species in which a rescue mutant with a positive growth rate establishes,
remain in the community. In other words, evolutionary rescue occurs on a
community-wide basis.

We present a parsimonious model of this Community-Wide Rescue (CWR)
process. It describes the change in species abundances, during and after
community-wide evolutionary rescue. We assume that all species are

                                                                                                             213
equivalent; they all start with the same negative growth rate and all have the
same fixed mutation rate towards a phenotype with a positive growth rate.
These assumptions are inspired by those made in the neutral model of
biodiversity (Hubbell, 1997). The neutral model has been shown to be able
to explain various patterns of species abundances, and has become a
baseline model for community diversity patterns when species differences or
species asymmetries are ignored (Alonso et al. 2006, Rosindell et al. 2011,
Wennekes et al. 2012, Scheffer et al. 2018). However, because we include an
explicit mutational process that introduces a different growth rate, our
Community-Wide Rescue model is not strictly neutral. We compare our
results with those of two neutral models, in which the community dynamics
are solely governed by ecological drift, that serve as null models.

The aim of this paper is to construct and explore a simple model for the CWR
process, and to examine how under this model CWR affects the patterns of
species abundances within a community. We quantify these patterns using
Rank Abundance Curves (RAC, also known as rank abundance diagrams or
distributions, RAD, McGill et al. 2007). It is well known that many different
mechanisms can generate similar RACs, and hence RACs should be
interpreted with caution (Chave et al. 2002). We aim to see if this general
pattern also holds for our CWR model, or if perhaps RACs are informative
about the (past) occurrence of CWR. We show that CWR causes a loss of rare
species from the community due to competition and a limited supply of
mutations. However, RACs produced by the CWR process could equally well
have been produced by a neutral model. In addition, as RACs proved
uninformative, we also examined the rate at which CWR changes the relative
species abundances (i.e. alters the RAC) and compare this to the rate at which
ecological drift alters species abundance patterns. We show that CWR causes
an extremely rapid loss of rare species. Such insights are crucial to
understand the effects of global change on ecological communities.

214
Methods

Our model of the CWR process is a continuous-time individual-based
stochastic model, where birth, death, and mutation events are simulated
using the Doob-Gillespie algorithm (Gillespie 1976). We assume that all
species are equivalent except for their initial densities. This assumption is
unlikely to hold in a natural community, but its simplicity allows us to focus
on the key ingredients of the CWR process. Furthermore, we consider a single
closed community, i.e. there is no immigration. It is worth noting that this
implies that the observed dynamics are transient in nature, when time goes
to infinity all species will eventually go extinct due ecological drift. This
assumption allows us to more clearly see the effect of CWR in a single (local)
community. In the CWR model, the community consists of several species,
each with an initial abundance that is drawn using the sampling formula for
standard neutral communities (Etienne 2005). Initially, all individuals of each
species have the same negative growth rate. We call an individual with this
negative growth rate a "resident". The initial community thus represents a
community immediately after a drastic environmental change, in which the
populations of all species are declining and unless adaptation occurs
extinction is inevitable for all species. However, each resident individual can
undergo a mutation to become a mutant individual, this occurs with a rate 
(note that this process implicitly assumes haploid inheritance). Again, the
value for  is the same, regardless of the species to which an individual
belongs. All mutants have the same positive growth rate. Hence, we assume
the simplest possible model of evolutionary rescue, as posited by Orr &
Unkcless (2008) and Martin et al. (2013): only a single mutational step is
required to achieve a positive growth rate and this mutation has a constant
fitness effect.  could for example represent the mutation rate toward
antibiotic resistance, see also Martin et al. (2013).

The growth rates of the residents and mutants are implemented as follows.
The death rates for the residents and the mutants are equal and given by d.
We assume that the birth rate for both mutants and residents depends on
total community size (i.e. total number of individuals in the community of all
species combined),

                                                                                                             215
Equation  1:    =  0(1  -      )
                             

where b0 is the rate of birth in a pristine community (no other individuals
present). This parameter b0 is different between residents and mutants
(hence, we have b0, res and b0, mut). We assume that b0, res < d so that the
resident always has a negative growth rate and b0, mut > d, so that the mutants
always have a positive growth rate. Parameter K is the number of individuals
at which the birth rate is equal to 0, and Ntot is the total number of individuals
(summed across species, including both residents and mutants) in the
community. It is important to note that K is not the sole parameter
controlling the carrying capacity of the community, this is determined by the
interplay of b0, d, and K and is given by K*(1- d / b0). Our model deviates from
standard neutral models in that we do not impose a zero-sum constraint
(otherwise the community cannot decline), and that instead we have
community-wide density-dependent birth. Haegeman and Etienne (2008)
showed that community-level density-dependence in immigration and birth
does not affect the predictions on the species abundance distributions, so
we do not strongly deviate from a standard neutral model in this sense. The
default parameter set for simulating the CWR model was b0,res = 0.05, b0,mut =
0.6, d = 0.1, K = 16000, and  = 0.0005. The initial species abundances for all
simulations were generated with the sampling formula for standard neutral
communities as derived by Etienne (2005) using a community size of 16000,
a fundamental biodiversity number, , of 200 and a migration parameter, I,
of 40. In this neutral model, the fundamental biodiversity number controls
the species abundance distribution in the regional species pool, whilst the
migration parameter governs the frequency of migration from the regional
species pool to the local species pool. For a more complete description the
reader is referred to Etienne & Olf (2004) and Etienne (2005). Here this model
is simply used to generate a reasonable initial species abundance
distribution. The exact same initial species abundance distribution was used
for all simulations, unless stated otherwise. All simulations, plots and analysis
were performed using R version 3.5.1 (R Core Team, 2014). All new

216
simulation code is provided in the CWERNI R-package that is available at:
https://github.com/DeadParrot69/CWERNI.

To answer the question whether an endpoint RAC from a CWR community
can be distinguished from a RAC generated by a neutral community, we used
a simulation, fitting and re-simulation approach. First, we simulated a
community using CWR, with the default parameters. Subsequently, we fitted
a neutral model to the RAC using the SADISA-package (Haegeman and
Etienne 2017). From this fit we obtain a log-likelihood, which in essence is a
measure of the goodness of fit of the neutral model on the RAC generated
using CWR. To generate a distribution of log-likelihoods with which to
compare the log-likelihood of the neutral model fit on the CWR RAC, the
parameters obtained from the neutral model fit were used to perform 500
neutral model simulations (Etienne 2005). Then, the SADISA-package
(Haegeman and Etienne 2017) was used on each of these neutral simulations
to fit a neutral model. This created a distribution of log-likelihoods for these
neutral model simulations. Subsequently we determined whether the log-
likelihood obtained from the neutral model fit on the CWR RAC falls outside
or inside the distribution of the log-likelihoods obtained through neutral
model fits on neutral model simulations. Instead of the log-likelihood we also
looked at the distribution of two different diversity indexes, the Shannon and
Rényi entropy of the simulated communities. This process was repeated ten
times each time with a newly drawn neutral starting community. We note
that the model underlying the SADISA estimates is subtly different from that
used to perform the re-simulations. The SADISA estimator makes an
independent species assumption, whilst the code used for the simulations
instead assumes a zero-sum assumption, but it has been shown that the RACs
that these model produce are indistinguishable (Haegeman and Etienne
2008, 2017).
In order to place the rate of rare species loss due to CWR into context, we
compared it to the rate of rare species loss in a local community due to
ecological drift in two truly neutral models. The first is a simple neutral model
(SN) without a CWR process, where the birth and death rates are equal to
those of the mutant in the CWR model. This model is thus a neutral model of

                                                                                                             217
the local community without immigration or speciation; it only describes the
loss of species through ecological drift.

We expected the CWR model to show a decrease in total community size
before recovery (due to the negative growth rate of the residents). Such a
decrease in local community size, can accelerate the rate of rare species loss
through ecological drift. Therefore, we also constructed a neutral model
similar to SN, but where the basic birth probability for all species is set to a
value less than the death probability for a predetermined time interval. This
induces a steady decrease in total community size from the start of the
simulation until the end of the interval. We chose the length of the interval,
such that the community size decrease is similar to that observed during
CWR. We call this model the variable-birth neutral model (VBN).

We simulated the three models (CWR, SN, and VBN) for 100 units of time.
This was a sufficient number for all residents to go extinct in the CWR model,
see also supplementary material figure 6. When there are no more residents
in the community the evolutionary rescue process is considered complete,
hence we chose to simulate for 100 units of time. Each model was simulated
500 times. The SN model was simulated using the parameters b0 = 0.6, d =
0.1, and K = 16000 ( i.e. the same parameters as the mutants in the CWR
model). For the VBN model we set the basic birth rate of all the species in the
community (b0) equal to b0, res, during the first twenty units of time. After this
time interval, which was tuned so as to create a decrease in total community
size similar or perhaps even slightly larger in nature than that in the CWR
community, we set the basic birth rate equal to b0, mut. The other parameters
were the same as in the SN model. To study the RAC of a community at
different stages of CWR, we plotted the resulting RACs at different points in
time: t = 15, t = 30, t = 50, t = 75 and t = 100.

In models examining evolutionary rescue, the mutation rate and the
establishment probability of the mutant are known to determine the
probability of evolutionary rescue (Martin et al. 2013). Therefore, to gain
more insight into our CWR model, we wanted to examine the effect of the
mutation rate () and mutant birth rate (b0, mut), on the CWR process. by

218
respectively varying the mutation rates ( = 0.00005, 0.0005, 0.005, 0.05) and
the mutant birth rate (b0, mut = 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8), and leaving all other
parameters the same as in the default parameter set. Again, we ran 500
independent simulations for each set of parameters.
In our CWR model we assumed that b0, res < d so that the resident always has
a negative growth rate. If this condition is not satisfied, one is no longer
modelling evolutionary rescue. However, one can imagine a scenario in
which b0, res > d, for example when a bacterial community is confronted with
sub-inhibitory concentrations of antibiotics. In such a community the species
are not doomed to go extinct, but residents are simply replaced by fitter
mutants, in essence a community-wide selective sweep. Such situations
might be much more common than strict evolutionary rescue scenarios, so
examining this situation could extend the applicability of our model.
Therefore, we also studied a selective sweep model, derived from our CWR
model, in which the only difference is that b0, res > d, resulting in both a
resident and a mutant with a positive net growth rate, whilst the mutant still
has a higher net growth rate than the resident. We performed 500
simulations of this model using the parameter set b0, res = 0.3 and all other
parameters the same as in the default CWR model parameter set.

                                                                                                             219
Results

The loss of rare species in the CWR community (figure 1A, 1B) is much faster
than in the neutral (SN) community (figure 1C, 1D). In other words, the CWR
process causes a very rapid loss of rare species, when compared to the rate
of rare species loss from a local community due to ecological drift.
Furthermore, the rate of rare species loss in the CWR model is also much
larger than in the VBN model (figure 1E, 1F). Because the VBN model has a
variable carrying capacity tuned to create a decrease in total community size
similar to the one observed in the CWR model, we can conclude that the
rapid loss of rare species in the CWR model is not just due to ecological drift
being accelerated by a decrease in total community size. In addition, the
observed rapid loss of rare species occurs consistently in a relatively wide
range of community sizes (K=16000 - K=1000, see supplementary materials
figures 12-14)

220
Figure 1: RACs and total community size under the CWR, SN and VBN models. Panels A, C, E
show the RACs produced after 100 units of time by the CWR model, the SN model and the
VBN model, where the median is shown in black, the 25th and the 75th percentile are shown in
blue and the 5th and the 95th percentile are shown in grey, the initial community is plotted in
red. Panels B, D and F show the accompanying trajectories of total community size for each
simulation over time. All plots are based on 500 simulations. Parameters for A and B: b0, res =
0.05, b0, mut = 0.6, d = 0.1, K = 16000, and  = 0.0005, for C and D: b0 = 0.6, d = 0.1 and K = 16000,
for E and F: b0 = 0.05 for t between 0 and 20, b0 = 0.6 for t between 20 and 100, d = 0.1, and K
= 16000.

                                                                                                             221
The same pattern is evident if one examines the figures showing the RACs at
different time points for each of the three models (figure 2, supplementary
materials figures 7 and 8). Furthermore, by closely examining figure 2 one
can see exactly at which point during the CWR process the loss of rare species
occurs. During the first stage of CWR a community-wide decline occurs that
does not greatly alter the shape of the RAC (Figure 2A). It is only as the first
mutants begin to invade and the total community size starts to rebound
(figure 2F) that the shape of the RAC begins to change and that the loss of
rare species starts to occur (figure 2B). The loss of rare species continues
after the community size has stabilized (figure 2C, 2D). Once the residents
have disappeared from the population, the shape of the RAC is fairly stable
(figures 2D, 2E, 2F).

222
Figure 2: Time trajectory of the RAC under the CWR model. Plots based on 500 CWR
simulations using the (default) parameters b0, res = 0.05, b0, mut = 0.6, d = 0.1, K = 16000 and 
= 0.0005. Panels A, B, C, D, and E. show the RAC of the community at t = 15, t= 30, t = 50, t =
75 and t = 100 respectively, were the median is shown in black, the 25th and the 75th percentile
are shown in blue and the 5th and the 95th percentile are shown in grey, and the input
community is plotted in red. Panel F shows the trajectories of the total community size (black),
the total number of residents in the communities (green) and the total number of mutants in
the community (blue).

                                                                                                             223
The mutation rate has a strong influence on the results (figure 3). If the
mutation rate is very high, rescue becomes so likely that all species undergo
rescue and there is no loss of rare species beyond the effects of normal
ecological drift in a neutral community without speciation/immigration
(figure 3A, 3B). By contrast, if the mutation rate is very low, almost none of
the species in the community undergo rescue (figure 3E) and in some cases
not a single rescue mutant manages to establish itself in the community
(figure 3F). Therefore, intermediate mutation rates seem to be required for
CWR to impact the RAC and create a loss of rare species greater than that
produced by ecological drift alone. In other words, the rate of rare species
loss during CWR depends on the mutation rate.

224
Figure 3: RACs (A, C, E) and total community size trajectories (B, D, F) under the CWR process,
for different mutation probabilities (), for each different mutation rate 500 simulations were
performed. In the RAC plots the median is shown in black, the 25th and the 75th percentile are
shown in blue, the 5th and the 95th percentile are shown in grey and the initial community is
plotted in red. Simulations were performed using the parameters b0, res = 0.05, b0, mut = 0.6, d =
0.1, and K = 16000. For A and B  = 0.05, in C and D  = 0.005 and in E and F  = 0.000005. The
total community size trajectories were plotted for of each of the 500 simulations, hence the
separation of these trajectories at low mutation rates (F).

                                                                                                             225
Increasing b0, mut i.e. increasing the fitness advantage of the mutant, does not
seem to influence the loss of rare species, as the RAC's obtained after the
CWR process, for different values of b0, mut are indistinguishable (figure 4).
However, increasing b0, mut does seem to increase the speed of the rescue
process. In particular, if b0, mut is higher, the recovery phase of the rescue
process proceeds much faster, due to the higher maximal growth rate of the
mutant. It should be noted that increasing b0, mut also increases the net
carrying capacity of the rescued population, because despite a constant K,
the net carrying capacity is the density where the birth probability is equal to
the death probability. The net carrying capacity is given by K*(1- d / b0).
Despite this increased carrying capacity, the recovery phase is still much
faster in the simulations with a high b0, mut.

226
Figure 4: The RAC under CWR processes with different mutant birth probabilities (b0, mut). All
simulations were performed using the parameters b0, res = 0.05, d = 0.1, K = 16000, and  =
0.0005. In panels A and B b0, mut = 0.2, for C and D b0, mut = 0.4 and in E and F b0, mut = 0.8. Panels
A, C and E show the RAC's after 100 units of time, where the median is shown in black, the
25th and the 75th percentile are shown in blue and the 5th and the 95th percentile are shown
in grey, with the input community plotted in red. Panels B, D, and F display the trajectories of
total community size over time. All plots are based on 500 simulations.

                                                                                                             227
In the selective sweep model, the residents have a positive net growth rate,
i.e. instead of CWR, the resident with a positive growth rate is replaced by a
mutant with an even higher growth rate. As can be seen in figure 5B, there is
only a very minor decrease in the total community size during this
replacement process. However as can be seen in figure 5A, the rate of rare
species loss in the selective sweep model is much higher than in the neutral
SN and VBN models. In other words, when compared to ecological drift,
community wide adaptation can cause a very rapid loss of rare species, just
like CWR.

Figure 5: The RAC (A) and the total community size (B) for simulations of the CWR model
where the strict conditions of CWR are relaxed and reflect a scenario where the net growth
rate of the residents is positive, yet still lower than that of the mutants. This causes a selective
sweep during which the residents are replaced by the mutants, because the mutants have a
higher fitness. In the RAC plot the median is shown in black, the 25th and the 75th percentile
are shown in blue and the 5th and the 95th percentile are shown in grey, and the input
community is plotted in red. These plots are based on 500 simulations. The parameters used
were b0, res = 0.3, b0, mut = 0.6, d = 0.1, K = 16000 and  = 0.0005.

The fitting and re-simulation approach using the log-likelihoods of neutral
model fits showed that the log-likelihood of a neutral model fit on the CWR
model results consistently fell within the distribution of log-likelihoods
obtained from neutral model simulations (supplementary material figure
9A). A similar result was obtained when instead of log-likelihoods, the values
of the Shannon entropy and the Rényi entropy of the RACs were used; the
values of the Shannon entropy and the Rényi entropy estimated from the

228
CWR RAC consistently fell inside those estimated on neutral model
simulations simulated using neutral model parameters estimated from the
CWR RACs (supplementary material figure 9B, 9C). Both of these results
imply that there is no information in an endpoint RAC alone that would allow
one to determine whether that RAC had been created by a neutral process
or a CWR process.

Discussion

We have shown that a single endpoint RAC does not allow one to determine
whether that RAC had been created by a neutral process or a CWR process.
This conclusion is in accordance with the general pattern in the literature;
whilst some non-neutral processes, such as trait based environmental
filtering (Jabot, 2010), can be detected by examining species abundances,
many different non-neutral processes can generate surprisingly similar RACs
(Chave et al. 2002).

The most striking outcome of our modelling effort is that CWR (figure 1A, 1B)
causes a very rapid loss of rare species, when compared to ecological drift
(figure 1C, 1D). This holds even if one accounts for the increase in ecological
drift due to a decrease in total community size as in the VBN model (figure
1E, 1F). Furthermore, this result is shown for a wide range of community sizes
(K=16000 - K=1000, see supplementary materials figures 12-14). In a neutral
model governed by ecological drift, rare species are more likely to go extinct
simply due to their lower abundance. However, in the CWR model rare
species have a higher probability of going extinct, because their low
abundance also means that they will have a lower probability of producing a
beneficial mutant before going extinct. In other words, for rare species the
supply of beneficial mutations is limited by their low abundance. This
dependence of the probability of rescue on the initial population density is
well characterized in standard models of evolutionary rescue and has also
been demonstrated empirically (Bell & Gonzalez 2009, Martin et al. 2013).
Low abundance causes a low probability of a beneficial mutant occurring,
because mutation occurs on a per-capita basis, so during the same time
interval a mutation is less likely to occur in a small population. Furthermore,

                                                                                                             229
the time to extinction for rare species is lower, so there is less time for a
mutant to arise before the rare species goes extinct.

However, there is another effect, hypothesized by Bell (2017), which
contributes to the loss of rare species: competition. This represents a crucial
difference between our model and standard models of evolutionary rescue
(Martin et al. 2013). In our model the birth rate of all species is governed by
the total number of individuals in the community (regardless of their
species), all species compete with each other (community-level density
dependence). So, a species that has undergone rescue will increase the total
number of individuals in the community. This causes the birth-rate of the
remaining species to decrease. For the species that have not yet undergone
rescue, this accelerates their decay, decreasing the time available to find a
mutant before going extinct. In other words, the evolutionary rescue of one
species, promotes the extinction of its competitors (Bell 2017). Rare species
that do manage to produce a mutant will tend to do so relatively late in the
simulation, because their low abundance gives them a low probability of
producing a mutant per unit of time. On the other hand, species with a high
abundance that manage to produce a mutant will tend to do so relatively
early on in the simulation, thereby promoting the extinction of the rare
species through competition. It is interesting to contrast these results with
those of De Mazancourt et al. (2008), who showed that on a community level
biodiversity can inhibit adaptation, due to competitive interactions. In our
model, the fact that rare species fail to adapt is also partly driven by
competitive interactions, in that sense reaffirming the general result that
competition can inhibit adaptation. However, the crucial difference is that in
the model of De Mazancourt et al. (2008) these competitive interactions are
driven by explicit assumptions about the ecology of each species, whilst in
our model species are ecologically equivalent except for their initial
abundance.

In our model, the limited supply of beneficial mutations at low abundance
and competition between the species together disproportionally promote
the extinction of rare species during CWR. These two effects are also crucial
to understand how changing the mutation rate impacts the CWR process

230
(figure 3). From standard models of evolutionary rescue it follows that a high
mutation rate results in a high probability of rescue (Martin et al. 2013).
Furthermore, in our model a high mutation rate implies that mutations occur
at very similar times for different species, limiting the competitive advantage
of common species that rescue early. Therefore, if the mutation rate is too
high, almost all species undergo rescue and very little rare species loss occurs
(figure 3A, 3B). For very low mutation rates the opposite holds true and very
few species undergo rescue (figure 3E, 3F). It should be noted that at very
low mutation rates, in some cases not even a single species undergoes
rescue. So, in other words, a lower mutation rate causes a greater loss of rare
species, yet if the mutation rate is too low no rescue occurs and the entire
community goes extinct.

The influence of the mutant birth rate (b0, mut) on the CWR process (figure 4)
is not as straightforward. Based on standard models of evolutionary rescue,
increasing the mutant birth rate should increase the fixation probability of
the mutant and thereby increase the probability of rescue. Furthermore,
increasing the mutant birth rate should also increase the competitive
advantage of those species that rescue early. However, contrary to our
expectations, we observed that an increase in the mutant birth rate does not
cause an increase in the loss of rare species. Instead, an increase in the
mutant birth rate only seems to affect the speed of the CWR process. This is
in part due to the fact that an increase in the mutant birth rate also increases
the overall carrying capacity of the community. This increase could offset the
competitive advantage of the species that rescue early. Because they grow
faster, the equilibrium community size is also larger. However, this increase
in the community size does not influence the fixation probability of the
mutant as derived in classical models of evolutionary rescue. Therefore, the
fact that increasing the mutant birth rate does not increase the loss of rare
species indicates that competition between early and late rescuing species is
the more dominant mechanism responsible for the loss of rare species. This
emphasizes the added value of our current modelling approach for
understanding evolutionary rescue in a multi-species context.

                                                                                                             231
We also created a different model based on the CWR model where we
allowed the residents to have a positive growth rate (b0, res > d). Relaxing this
assumption implies that this model does not reflect a strict evolutionary
rescue scenario, as this requires a decaying resident population. This model
represents a community wide selective sweep, during which residents with a
positive growth rate are replaced by mutants with an even higher growth
rate. When comparing this selective sweep model (figure 5A, B) to the
neutral SN and VBN model it is evident that the community wide selective
sweep causes a rapid loss of rare species when compared to ecological drift.
However, the rate of rare species loss is lower than in the CWR model.
Hence, one might conclude that community wide adaptation in general leads
to a loss of rare species, implying that our findings from the CWR model are
more generally applicable. Furthermore, as there is no evolutionary rescue
process in our selective sweep model, the only mechanism responsible is the
competition between species that have found the high fitness mutant. Hence
the fact that competition alone is enough to cause the rapid rare species loss
in the selective sweep model also indicates that competition is a more
dominant mechanism of rare species loss in the CWR model.

As emphasized before, our CWR model assumes a simple model of
evolutionary rescue. Most notably, rescue requires only a single mutation
step, with a fixed positive fitness effect. For some situations these
assumptions should provide a reasonable approximation. For example, the
evolution of resistance to certain antibiotics requires only a single or very few
mutations. In addition, the mechanisms underlying resistance can be quite
similar across different species (Hooper & Jacoby 2015). However, obviously
these simple assumptions do not hold under all biological circumstances. So
how would a more complex assumptions regarding mutation affect the
outcome of our CWR model? Allowing multiple mutational steps of varying
fitness effects would serve to make the competition during the rescue
process more asymmetrical. Therefore, this would be expected to cause an
even greater loss of rare species compared to our current CWR model.

The CWR model presented here assumes that all species are (initially) equal,
differing only in their initial abundances, an assumption inspired by the

232
neutral theory of biodiversity. Evidently this assumption is unlikely to strictly
hold in natural communities, yet it allows us to create a relatively simple
model. Furthermore, our model does not consider immigration and
speciation. Future CWR models could include mutation probabilities, birth
probabilities, and death probabilities that differ across species, and include
migration and speciation. It will be interesting to see whether demographic
rescue, by immigration, will counteract or aid evolutionary rescue by
mutation.

It is striking that the change in the shape of the RAC produced by the CWR
process i.e. one devoid of rare species is a pattern commonly observed by
ecologists in "stressed" or disturbed communities (Bazzaz 1975, Halloy and
Barratt 2007, Webb et al. 2011). Additionally, antibiotic treatment also
seems to cause a similar loss of rare species in the microbiome of patients,
which persists long after the treatment (Sommer and Dantas 2011).
Interestingly, a study of benthic foraminifera during the Palaeocene-Eocene
thermal maximum by Webb et al. (2009) showed a decrease in richness, an
increase in kurtosis, and a decrease in evenness during the Palaeocene-
Eocene thermal maximum, i.e. a change in the shape of the RAC that would
also be consistent with a CWR scenario.

However, it is important to realize that there are countless other ecological
explanations that may account for the loss of rare species in stressed
environments. For example, rare species tend to be more specialized and are
hence more sensitive to disturbance (Davies et al. 2004). Or the loss of a
single keystone species can in turn lead to the loss of many rare species that
may depend on it (Rapport et al. 1985). Thus, if rapid loss of rare species is
observed, that is much faster than would be expected due to ecological drift,
this does not per se imply an underlying CWR process.

However, this does not mean that CWR is a hypothetical process with little
relevance, to real ecological communities. Experimentalists are examining
evolutionary rescue in a community context. The examples include
microbiomes adapting to antibiotic treatment (Roodgar et al. 2019); soil
microbial communities adapting to herbicides (Low-Décarie et al. 2015) and

                                                                                                             233
lacustrine plankton communities adapting to acidification (Bell et al. 2019).
There are many more situations in which CWR could be considered as a
potential mechanism for rare species loss, as many ecosystems face
irreversible human induced environmental change on a community-wide
level (Vitousek et al. 1997).

All in all, the current CWR model represents an initial exploration of CWR and
could be considered as a baseline model regarding the effect of community
wide evolutionary rescue on species abundances. Yet, this simple model
provides a clear testable prediction regarding the effect of CWR on species
abundances: Community Wide Rescue causes a very rapid loss of rare
species.

Conflict of interest

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential
conflict of interest.

Author contributions

TJBvE was primarily responsible for the conception of the idea, programming,
simulation, analysis and writing of this manuscript. KB contributed to the
development of the ideas and provided extensive input regarding the writing
of the manuscript. RSE contributed to the development of the ideas,
proposed modelling strategies, suggested analyses and provided extensive
input regarding the writing of the manuscript.

Funding

TJBvE wishes to thank the Erasmus Mundus Programme in Evolutonary
biology (MEME) for the opportunities and funding provided, and F. J.
Weissing for his continuous support. RSE thanks the Netherlands
Organisation for Scientfic Research (NWO) for funding through a VICI grant.
This project has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC)
under the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation
programme (grant agreement No 789240).

234
Acknowledgements

We are greatly indebted to Pedro Neves, Inès Daras and Richel Bilderbeek for
their valuable comments on the model and the manuscript. Furthermore,
Rixt Heerschop is thanked for a proofreading and her help in preparing the
figures. In addition, we thank S. Panish-Inq. for her unexpected comments.
In addition, we thank Mika van Eldijk for providing computational resources
when they were most needed. Furthermore, we would like to thank François
Massol and five anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments which
greatly improved the manuscript. The authors declare no conflicts of
interest.

References

Arumugam, M. et al. (2011). Enterotypes of the human gut microbiome.
Nature 473, 174-180.
Alexander, H. K. et al. (2014). Evolutionary rescue: linking theory for
conservation and medicine. Evolutionary applications, 7(10), 1161-1179.
Alonso et al. (2006). The merits of neutral theory. Trends in ecology and
evolution, 21.8, 451-457.
Bazzaz, F.A. (1975). Plant Species Diversity in Old-Field Successional
Ecosystems in Southern Illinois. Ecology, 56, 485-488.
Bell, G., & Gonzalez, A. (2009). Evolutionary rescue can prevent extinction
following environmental change. Ecology letters, 12, 942-948.
Bell, G. & Gonzalez, A. (2011). Adaptation and evolutionary Rescue in
metapopulations experiencing environmental deterioration. Science, 1327,
1327-1331.
Bell, G. (2017). Evolutionary rescue. Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and
Systematics, 48, 605-627.
Bell, G. et al. (2019). Trophic structure modulates community rescue
following acidification. Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 286(1904),
20190856.
Chave, J., Muller-Landau, H. C., and Levin, S. A. (2002). Comparing classical
community models: theoretical consequences for patterns of diversity. The
American Naturalist, 159(1), 1-23.
Cho, I. and Blaser, M.J. (2012). The human microbiome: at the interface of

                                                                                                             235
health and disease. Nature Reviews Genetics, 13, 260­270.

Cortez, M. H., & Yamamichi, M. (2019). How (co) evolution alters predator

responses to increased mortality: extinction thresholds and hydra effects.

Ecology, 100(10), e02789.

Davies, K. F., Margules, C. R., and Lawrence, J. F. (2004). A synergistic effect

puts rare, specialized species at greater risk of extinction. Ecology, 85, 265-

271.

De Mazancourt, C., Johnson, E., & Barraclough, T. G. (2008). Biodiversity

inhibits species' evolutionary responses to changing environments. Ecology

Letters, 11(4), 380-388.

Etienne, R. S., & Olff, H. (2004). A novel genealogical approach to neutral

biodiversity theory. Ecology Letters, 7(3), 170-175.

Etienne, R.S. (2005). A new sampling formula for neutral biodiversity. Ecology

Letters, 8, 253-260.

Gillespie, D. T. (1976). A general method for numerically simulating the

stochastic time evolution of coupled                       chemical

reactions. Journal of computational physics, 22, 403-434.

Gonzalez, A. et al. (2012). Evolutionary rescue: an emerging focus at the

intersection between ecology and evolution. Philosophical Transactions of

the Royal Society B, 368, 20120404.

Gomulkiewicz, R., & Holt, R. D. (1995). When does evolution by natural

selection prevent extinction?. Evolution, 49, 201-207.

Haegeman, B. and Etienne, R.S. (2008). Relaxing the zero-sum assumption in

neutral biodiversity theory. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 252, 288-294.

Haegeman, B. and Etienne, R.S. (2017). A general sampling formula for

community structure data. Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 8, 1506-1519.

Halloy, S.R.P. and Barratt, B.I.P. (2007). Patterns of abundance and

morphology as indicators of ecosystem status: A meta-analysis. Ecological

Complexity, 4, 128-147.

Hoffmann, A. A. and Sgrò, C. M. (2011). Climate change and evolutionary

adaptation. Nature, 470, 479-485.

Hooper, D. C., & Jacoby, G. A. (2015). Mechanisms of drug resistance:

quinolone resistance. Annals of the New York academy of sciences, 1354(1),

12.

236
Hubbell, S.P. (1997). A unified theory of biogeography and relative species
abundance and its application to tropical rain forests and coral reefs. Coral
Reefs, 16, S9-S21.
IPCC. (2014). Climate change (2014): synthesis report. Core Writing Team,
R.K. Pachauri L.A. Meyer.
Jabot, F. (2010). A stochastic dispersal-limited trait-based model of
community dynamics. Journal of theoretical biology, 262(4), 650-661.
Low-Décarie et al. (2015). Community rescue in experimental
metacommunities. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112,
14307-14312.
Lasky, J. R. (2019). Eco-evolutionary community turnover following
environmental change. Evolutionary applications, 12(7), 1434-1448.
Martin, G. et al. (2013). The probability of evolutionary rescue: towards a
quantitative comparison between theory and evolution experiments.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 368, 20120088.
McGill, B.J. et al. (2007). Species abundance distributions: moving beyond
single prediction theories to integration within an ecological framework.
Ecology Letters, 10, 995­1015.
Northfield, T. D., & Ives, A. R. (2013). Coevolution and the effects of climate
change on interacting species. PLoS Biology, 11(10), e1001685.
Orr, H. A., and Unckless, R. L. (2008). Population extinction and the genetics
of adaptation. The American Naturalist, 172(2), 160-169.
Orr, H.A. and Unckless, R.L. (2014). The Population Genetics of Evolutionary
Rescue. PLoS Genetics, 10, 1-9.
Osmond, M. M., & De Mazancourt, C. (2013). How competition affects
evolutionary rescue. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, B
368(1610), 20120085.
R Core Team (2014). R: A language and environment for statistical
computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing. Vienna, Austria. URL
http://www.R-project.org/.
Rapport, D. J., Regier, H. A., and Hutchinson, T. C. (1985). Ecosystem behavior
under stress. The American Naturalist, 125(5), 617-640.
Rosindell, J. et al. (2011). The unified neutral theory of biodiversity and
biogeography at age ten. Trends in Ecology and Evolution, 26, 340-348.

                                                                                                             237
Roodgar, M. et al. (2019). Longitudinal linked read sequencing reveals
ecological and evolutionary responses of a human gut microbiome during
antibiotic treatment. bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.21.886093.
Scheffer, M. et al. (2018). Toward a unifying theory of biodiversity.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 201721114.
Sommer, M.O.A. and Dantas, G. (2011). Antibiotics and the resistant
microbiome. Current Opinion in Microbiology, 14, 556-563.
Webb, A.E. et al. 2009. Impact of the Paleocene-Eocene thermal maximum
on deep-ocean microbenthic community structure: using rank-abundance
curves to quantify paleoecological response. Geology, 37, 783-786.
Webb, A.E. et al. 2011. Exploring the ecological dynamics of extinciton ­ In
Laflamme M. and Dornbos S. Q. Quantifying the Evolution of Early Life.
Springer pp. 185­220.
Vitousek, P. M. et al. (1997). Human domination of earth's ecosystems.
Science, 277(5325), 494-499.
Wennekes, P. L., Rosindell, J., & Etienne, R. S. (2012). The neutral--niche
debate: a philosophical perspective. Acta biotheoretica, 60(3), 257-271.

238
      Supplementary material

Figure 6: Panel A shows a boxplot of the amount of residents and mutants at the end of each
of the 500 CWR simulations using the default parameters, this plot corresponds to figure 1A
and 1B. This boxplot looked the same for all other CWR simulations i.e. all residents had gone
completely extinct in all simulations (figures 2, 3 and 5), except for those simulations
performed under the selective sweep scenario. The distribution of residents and mutants at
the end of 500 CWR simulations for the selective sweep scenario (figure 4) is shown in panel
B.

                                                                                                             239
Figure 7: Time trajectory of the RAC under the SN model. Panels A, B, C, D, and E. show the
RAC of the community at t = 15, t= 30, t = 50, t = 75 and t = 100 respectively, were the
median is shown in black, the 25th and the 75th percentile are shown in blue and the 5th and
the 95th percentile are shown in grey, and the input community is plotted in red. Panel F
shows the trajectories of the total community. Plots are based on 500 SN simulations using
the parameters.

240
Figure 8: Time trajectory of the RAC under the VBN model A, B, C, D, and E. show the RAC of
the community at t = 15, t= 30, t = 50, t = 75 and t = 100 respectively, were the median is
shown in black, the 25th and the 75th percentile are shown in blue and the 5th and the 95th
percentile are shown in grey, and the input community is plotted in red. Panel F shows the
trajectories of the total community. Plots are based on 500 VBN simulations using the
default parameters.

                                                                                                             241
Figure 9: Distribution of log-likelihoods under neutral simulations with parameters derived
from the neutral fit to the CWR simulation data. The log-likelihood of the neutral model fit on
the CWR simulation is shown in red. In total this analysis was repeated ten times, each time
producing the same result, here only a single example is shown.

Figure 10: Distribution of the Shannon entropy under neutral simulations with parameters
derived from the neutral fit to the CWR simulation data. The value of the Shanon entropy
(Reny entropy,  = 1) with of the CWR simulation RAC is shown in red. In total this analysis
was repeated ten times, each time producing the same result here only a single example is
shown.

242
Figure 11: Distribution of log-likelihoods under neutral simulations with parameters derived
from the neutral fit to the CWR simulation data. The value of the collision entropy (Reny
entropy,  = 2) with of the CWR simulation RAC is shown in red. In total this analysis was
repeated ten times, each time producing the same result here only a single example is shown.

                                                                                                             243
Figure 12: RACs and total community size under the CWR, SN and VBN models for K = 8000.
Panels A, C, E show the RACs produced after 100 units of time by the CWR model, the SN
model and the VBN model, where the median is shown in black, the 25th and the 75th
percentile are shown in blue and the 5th and the 95th percentile are shown in grey, the initial
community is plotted in red. Panels B, D and F show the accompanying trajectories of total
community size for each simulation over time. All plots are based on 500 simulations.
Parameters for A and B: b0, res = 0.05, b0, mut = 0.6, d = 0.1, K = 8000, and  = 0.0005, for C and
D: b0 = 0.6, d = 0.1 and K = 8000, for E and F: b0 = 0.05 for T between 0 and 20, b0 = 0.6 for T
between 20 and 100, d = 0.1, and K = 8000.

244
Figure 13: RACs and total community size under the CWR, SN and VBN models for K = 4000.
Panels A, C, E show the RACs produced after 100 units of time by the CWR model, the SN
model and the VBN model, where the median is shown in black, the 25th and the 75th
percentile are shown in blue and the 5th and the 95th percentile are shown in grey, the initial
community is plotted in red. Panels B, D and F show the accompanying trajectories of total
community size for each simulation over time. All plots are based on 500 simulations.
Parameters for A and B: b0, res = 0.05, b0, mut = 0.6, d = 0.1, K = 4000, and  = 0.0005, for C and
D: b0 = 0.6, d = 0.1 and K = 4000, for E and F: b0 = 0.05 for T between 0 and 20, b0 = 0.6 for T
between 20 and 100, d = 0.1, and K = 4000.

                                                                                                             245
Figure 14: RACs and total community size under the CWR, SN and VBN models for K = 1000.
Panels A, C, E show the RACs produced after 100 units of time by the CWR model, the SN
model and the VBN model, where the median is shown in black, the 25th and the 75th
percentile are shown in blue and the 5th and the 95th percentile are shown in grey, the initial
community is plotted in red. Panels B, D and F show the accompanying trajectories of total
community size for each simulation over time. All plots are based on 500 simulations.
Parameters for A and B: b0, res = 0.05, b0, mut = 0.6, d = 0.1, K = 1000, and  = 0.0005, for C and
D: b0 = 0.6, d = 0.1 and K = 1000, for E and F: b0 = 0.05 for T between 0 and 20, b0 = 0.6 for T
between 20 and 100, d = 0.1, and K = 1000.

246
     Chapter 8

_______________________________________

       Discussion

           Timo J.B. van Eldijk

                                                                                        247
In this thesis, I have studied evolvability, the ability of biological systems to
undergo adaptive evolution, in the context of antibiotic resistance.
Throughout I took a mechanistic approach, combining theory and
experiment. The purpose of this final chapter is twofold: I will first briefly
reflect on how some of my findings might be applied to combat the
emergence of antibiotic resistance and improve antibiotic treatment.
Second, I will reflect on what I perceive to be the way forward for evolvability
research.

Applying evolvability insights to combat antibiotic
resistance

Before discussing in detail how the insights into evolvability I obtained in this
thesis might be applied, a general word of caution is due. Whilst I have
extensively studied the evolution of antibiotic resistance in this thesis, I have
exclusively done so using theoretical models and controlled experiments in
the laboratory. Hence, the insights gained throughout this thesis are of a
more fundamental nature. The process of translating such insights into
clinical improvements requires many decades of further experiments,
modelling and clinical trials. Nonetheless, I think fundamental insights are
essential to facilitate the practical progress of the future. We need to look no
further than the history of antibiotics to find an illustrative example:
Alexander Fleming's fundamental work on penicillin in 1929 initially received
little attention. Yet, it was essential to the work of Ernst Boris Chain, Howard
Florey, and Norman who more than a decade later figured out how to
successfully isolate penicillin, turning it into a practically utilisable drug
(Gaynes et al. 2017). The fundamental insights of today are essential for
tomorrow's practical breakthroughs. In this first section of my discussion, I
hope to sketch out how the insights about evolvability in the context of
antibiotic resistance, that I obtained in this thesis, may in the future be
translated into practice. My purpose is to inspire those with more knowledge
of practical medical aspects to pick up the gauntlet.

248
Chapter 3 ­ Temperature dependent mutation rates

When populations are well adapted to their environment, a low mutation
rate is advantageous, since most mutations are deleterious. However, when
a population is poorly adapted, a higher mutation rate can be advantageous,
as the positive effects of beneficial mutations can outweigh the negative
effects of deleterious mutations. Therefore, elevated mutation rates can
evolve when a bacterial population is maladapted, a prime example of the
evolution of evolvability (Sniegowski et al., 1997; 2000). However, some
bacteria have also evolved a more refined solution to optimise their mutation
rate. In this case, the mutation rate is regulated depending on the conditions.
A good example of such a condition-dependent mutation rate is stress-
induced mutagenesis, which has been described in several different bacterial
species (MacLean et al., 2013). When the bacterial cell experiences stress
(indicative of maladaptation) the mutation rate is upregulated, for example
by using different error-prone DNA polymerases for DNA replication.

Stress-induced mutagenesis may be very relevant in the context of antibiotic
resistance: the mutation rate towards antibiotic resistance determines the
probability that a bacterial population will evolve resistance. Higher
mutation rates make it easier to evolve resistance. However, environmental
conditions can influence mutation rates in bacteria. Fever, a change in body
temperature in response to infection can alter the growth conditions of
infecting bacteria. Therefore in Chapter 3, I used laboratory experiments to
examine the effect of fever temperatures on the mutation rate towards
antibiotic resistance for three different antibiotics in Escherichia coli. I show
that in all cases the mutation rate toward resistance was influenced by fever
temperatures, however, the nature of this relationship differed per
antibiotic. For two antibiotics, rifampicin and ciprofloxacin, fever
temperatures lead to an increased mutation rate. For another antibiotic,
ampicillin, fever temperatures lead to a decreased mutation rate. Stress-
induced mutagenesis could provide an explanation for the observation that
the mutation rate towards resistance increases at fever temperatures for the
antibiotics ciprofloxacin and rifampicin. The different result for ampicillin is

                                                                                                             249
likely due to the temperature-dependent efficacy of this antibiotic, which I
demonstrated using a separate experiment.

Together these results suggest that coordinating the choice of antibiotic and
the choice to use fever-suppressing drugs when treating a patient could be
used to lower the mutation rate towards resistance. The findings from
Chapter 3 are perhaps the most promising when it comes to translation into
medical practice. They open a clear new avenue of research regarding the
effect of fever suppression on the evolution of resistance, potentially paving
the way for improved treatments. However, a word of caution is due. It
remains to be seen how the results from Chapter 3 translate to different
bacteria and antibiotic concentrations. Furthermore, a change in
temperature might also alter other parameters that affect the probability of
resistance evolution, such as the rate of killing of a non-resistant population
exposed to antibiotics (Mackowiack et al., 1981; Martin et al., 2013). In
addition, it is unclear how these in vitro results might hold up in vivo. For
example, the experiments leave the body's own antimicrobial defence
strategies out of consideration. It is well known that fever can play an
important role in stimulating the immune system. In other words, there are
still a lot of unanswered questions regarding the exact mechanism by which
fever might affect the evolution of antibiotic resistance. While we wait for
these mechanisms to be unravelled by follow-up fundamental research, we
may take a more empirical approach in order to translate the results from
Chapter 3 into improved treatments. Data on the impact of fever suppression
on the outcomes of severe infections treated with antibiotics has already
been gathered, using both observational studies and randomly controlled
trials (Young et al. 2015; Schnell-Chapele 2018). Overall analyses of these
data did not show a consistent positive effect of fever suppression on
treatment outcomes (Young et al. 2015; Schnell-Chapele 2018). However, in
Chapter 3 I showed that the impact of fever suppression on the mutation rate
differed per antibiotic. Therefore, I would suggest in the future that such data
should be analysed whilst taking into account the exact antibiotic used in the
antimicrobial treatment. In addition, future studies could gather real-time
data on the impact of within-patient and between-patient evolution of

250
resistance (for example using the methodology of Tueffers et al., 2019). It
could be that antibiotic-specific fever suppression strategies can prevent the
evolution of resistant strains, without necessarily improving within patient
treatment outcomes.

Chapter 4 ­ Condition-dependent mutation rates

Condition-dependent mutation rates have been empirically demonstrated in
several different species of bacteria (including in Chapter 3 of this thesis), but
some controversy surrounds the interpretation of these results (MacLean et
al., 2013). Some have argued for a non-adaptive explanation, where the
increase in the mutation rate is simply a side-effect of suboptimal functioning
under stressful conditions. Others have argued that the increase in the
mutation rate under stressful conditions represents an evolved response,
which optimises the mutation rate to facilitate adaptation and enhance
evolvability (MacLean et al., 2013). Therefore, in Chapter 4, I set out to
examine under what circumstances we would expect condition-dependent
mutation rates to evolve. I used an individual-based simulation model with
an environment that changes at different speeds, ranging from a change
every ten generations to a change every ten thousand generations. Such an
environment could represent a bacterial pathogen population which, over
the course of generations, faces different within-patient conditions (and
possibly antibiotics). Each individual has three evolving loci that determine
the mutation rate as a function of the fitness of the individual in the current
environment (i.e. degree of maladaptation).

The results of the model show that both condition-dependent and condition-
independent mutation strategies emerge, under a wide range of different
environments, ranging from environments that change every ten
generations to environments that change every thousand generations. I also
considered two scenarios for the mutation rate of the mutator loci: a `self-
referent' mutation rate that is determined by the mutator loci themselves,
and an externally determined (not self-referent) mutation rate. Previous
models of the evolution of condition-dependent mutation rates only
considered non-self-referent mutation rate loci. However, I would argue that

                                                                                                             251
many empirical examples, such as stress-induced mutagenesis, are to some
extent self-referent. After all, error-prone DNA polymerases are also used to
replicate the genes in which they are themselves encoded. When the
mutation rate loci are assumed to be self-referent, the condition-dependent
mutation strategy emerges at a much higher frequency. In addition, I also
show that condition-dependent mutation rates lead to better tracking of a
changing environment i.e., they improve evolvability. Considering these
results I conclude that condition-dependent mutation rates can evolve under
a large array of circumstances. This lends some credence to the idea that the
empirically observed condition-dependent mutation rates are indeed
evolved responses and not merely a side-effect. However, some caution is
due, as the model in Chapter 4 makes several important simplifying
assumptions. The environment considered is relatively simple. In reality, the
environment faced by infecting bacteria is much more complex. The
individuals in the model adapt using only a single trait. Additional traits under
stabilising selection are not considered in the model and hence some of the
deleterious effects of mutations are likely underestimated. The model
therefore possibly overestimates the range of conditions in which condition-
dependent mutation rates can arise.

I conclude that condition-dependent mutation rates can evolve under a wide
range of circumstances and can enhance adaptation to the environment (i.e.
enhance evolvability). Therefore, I would argue that evolved condition-
dependent mutation rates are likely to be widespread in bacteria. I
hypothesize that the empirical observations of condition-dependent
mutation rates in several bacterial species can be explained by selection for
evolvability. Furthermore, given that condition-dependent mutation rates
can enhance evolvability I would also expect them to play an important role
in the evolution of antibiotic resistance. Effectively applying this insight will
obviously require many more years of research, however, I believe that it
highlights a relevant research direction: interfering with condition-
dependent mutation rates could be a promising strategy to combat the
evolution of antibiotic resistance. One way to utilise the presence of
condition-dependent mutation rates is to modify the environment to

252
downregulate the stress response and minimize the mutation rate, thereby
decreasing the probability of resistance evolution. In Chapter 3 I studied a
particular implementation of this idea, however, there may be many other
ways to modify the environment. For example, the availability of carbon
sources, the environmental pH and quorum sensing (a proxy for cell density)
can impact the stress response (Joelsson et al., 2007; Arcari et al., 2020; Tapia
et al., 2020). Thus, these factors could perhaps be engineered to
downregulate the stress response, lowering the mutation rate, and slowing
the evolution of resistance. Alternatively, it may be possible to use molecules
that directly interfere with the mechanisms underlying the stress response,
such as N6-(1-naphthyl)-ADP, thereby preventing the upregulation of
mutation rates (Lee et al., 2005). The molecular mechanisms behind
condition-dependent mutation rates are only well understood in a few model
bacterial species (Tenallion et al., 2004; MacLean et al., 2013). Therefore,
future research into these fundamental mechanisms should be pursued with
the aim of uncovering new methods to lower the mutation rate towards
resistance.

Chapter 5 ­ Mutational transformers

Many standard evolutionary models commonly assume a relatively
straightforward relationship between the genotype and the phenotype. For
example, quantitative genetic models commonly assume that traits are
governed by many unlinked genes with infinitesimally small effects (Hill,
2010). However, in reality, there is a complex network of genetic interactions
and regulation that translate a genotype into a phenotype. It has been
demonstrated that taking into account this complex gene regulatory network
can drastically improve the predictions of trait evolution when compared to
more traditional quantitative genetics approaches (Milocco & Salazar-
Ciudad, 2020). A hallmark study by Crombach & Hogeweg (2008) showed
that explicitly modelling gene regulatory networks is also essential when
trying to understand evolvability. They modelled virtual cells that had to
adapt to an environment that alternated between two states. However, after
a while, adaptation occurred much more rapidly when the environment

                                                                                                             253
changed. The structure of the gene regulatory network had evolved and
transformed the phenotypic impact of some mutations in such a way that
relatively few mutations were required to achieve rapid adaptation to new
environmental conditions. In other words, Crombach and Hogeweg
demonstrated that evolvability can evolve through a restructuring of the
gene regulatory network.

I was greatly inspired by their work as it shows how evolvability can evolve
through the structure of gene regulatory networks. Furthermore, the
alternating environment they studied was reminiscent of the environment
faced by bacterial pathogens facing intermittent antibiotic treatment as they
move from host to host. Therefore, in Chapter 5 I aimed to further investigate
the phenomenon discovered by Crombach & Hogeweg (2008) which I have
termed "mutational transformation": A gene regulatory network is
structured in such a way that some mutations have a high phenotypic impact,
allowing to switch to a different adaptive phenotype in a few mutational
steps, thus facilitating rapid adaptation. As the Crombach-Hogeweg model is
very complex, making it difficult to understand the exact mechanisms
underlying mutational transformation, I investigated very simple gene-
regulatory-network models, allowing me to explore these mechanisms in
detail. In Chapter 5, I show that mutational transformers can evolve even in
very simple gene regulatory network models. I uncovered two distinct
mechanisms underlying mutational transformation: mutation amplifiers and
mutation canalisers. A mutation amplifier enlarges the phenotypic effects
mutation but the distribution of phenotypic effects remains unbiased. A
mutation canaliser biases the effects of mutations towards particular
(adaptive) phenotypic outcomes. These two mechanisms impact evolvability
in different ways, to use the terminology from Chapter 2; they have a
different scope. Mutation amplifiers can enhance evolvability even when the
environment changes erratically. On the other hand, mutation canalisers can
only enhance evolvability towards environments that have already occurred
repeatedly in the past. Based on these two mechanisms, I expect that
mutational transformers will also evolve in many different types of changing
environments, not just environments that alternate between two states.

254
Mutational transformers can easily evolve in a model that makes relatively
few assumptions about the exact nature of the gene regulatory networks.
Furthermore, in view of the plausible underlying mechanisms, mutational
transformers should be able to evolve and operate in many different types
of changing environments. This leads to the expectation that mutational
transformers are widespread in organisms that face changing environments.
When it comes to the evolution of antibiotic resistance bacterial pathogens
face just such an environment. As pathogenic bacteria transfer between
hosts, they alternatingly face environments with and without antibiotics,
each time undergoing evolutionary adapting to a change in the environment.
Therefore, I argue mutational transformers likely play a role in the evolution
of resistance. There is even some empirical evidence that supports this
assertion. Consider for example the phenomenon known as
"heteroresistance", where some bacterial strains can very rapidly evolve high
levels of resistance through gene duplications (Andersson et al., 2019). This
somewhat resembles a mutation canaliser: the effect of gene duplications
seems biased towards an adaptive outcome.

I think that taking into account mutational transformers in the context of
antibiotic resistance could help to improve treatment. If we can identify
mutational transformers for the evolution of resistance to certain antibiotics,
bacteria causing an infection could be screened for their presence. This
information could be used to evaluate how easily a certain pathogen can
evolve resistance to a certain antibiotic (i.e. evolvability in the context of
antibiotic resistance). Subsequently, this information might help us optimise
the choice of the antibiotic that will be used to combat a particular infection.
However, we can only account for mutational transformers if we can reliably
identify them. Currently empirically identifying mutational transformers in
bacteria is very difficult. It requires extensive analysis of the phenotypic
effects of mutations and evolutionary trajectories, a difficult and labour-
intensive process. While empirical examples exist that suggest the presence
of mutational transformers, as far as I know, no one has yet managed to
unequivocally identify an empirical mutational transformer. Nonetheless, in
the future the painstaking research aimed at empirically studying mutational

                                                                                                             255
transformers and their inner workings should be undertaken. Experimental
evolution (similar to the methodology used in Chapter 6) could be used to
examine evolutionary trajectories, whilst targeted mutagenesis could be
used to explore the distribution of phenotypic effects. I hope that coupled
with modelling efforts (such as the one presented in Chapter 5) such research
can lead to ways to identify mutational transformers quickly and reliably. It
could turn out that in the future some mutational transformers can be
identified simply on the basis of the structure of a gene regulatory network
or the presence of particular genes. In this case, sequencing methods could
be employed to rapidly identify relevant mutational transformers in bacterial
pathogens, potentially enhancing antibiotic treatment.

Chapter 6 ­ Horizontal gene transfer

Many clinically relevant antibiotic resistance genes are located on
extrachromosomal elements called plasmids. Plasmids can be horizontally
transferred between cells through a process known as conjugation. Plasmids
can play an important role in the spread of antibiotic resistance. However,
before antibiotic resistance can spread, it must first arise. The role of
plasmids in the de-novo evolution of resistance is much less well studied. It
has been hypothesised that plasmids might facilitate the evolution of
resistance (i.e. enhance evolvability), for example by bringing together
resistance genes from separate clonal lineages. Therefore, in Chapter 6 I used
experimental evolution to study the impact of plasmids on the de-novo
evolution of antibiotic resistance. I used a plasmid and a bacterial strain that
did not contain any antibiotic resistance genes at the start of the experiment.
Subsequently, I evolved populations with and without plasmids in the
presence of an increasing concentration of the antibiotic ciprofloxacin. This
experiment showed no significant effect of plasmids on the rate of resistance
evolution. It seems that in the context of this experiment, plasmids did not
enhance evolvability, perhaps due to the relatively short timescale of the
experiment.

However, the experiment I conducted in Chapter 6 did yield several other
interesting outcomes. I found that in Lactococcus lactis, ciprofloxacin

256
exposure creates selection against the plasmid. I hypothesise that having
extra DNA in the form of a plasmid is costly when evolving resistance to a
DNA-damaging antibiotic. Further study is required to see if this finding holds
up in other bacterial species and with other plasmids, which I would expect
based on the hypothesised mechanism. If ciprofloxacin can indeed effectively
create selection against plasmids this could be utilised in the fight against
antibiotic resistance, since many clinically relevant resistance genes are
located on plasmids. If, for example, an infecting bacterial population
contains plasmids that provide resistance against beta-lactam antibiotics, a
pre-treatment with ciprofloxacin could be used to decrease the abundance
of this resistance plasmid. This might then increase the effectiveness of a
subsequent treatment with a beta-lactam antibiotic. However, some words
of caution are due, depending on the clinical situation such a pre-treatment
might not be feasible, for example, if an infection is immediately life-
threatening. Furthermore, a pre-treatment might also create selection for
plasmid-borne resistance genes to be integrated into the chromosome,
especially if these resistance genes also convey some resistance against
ciprofloxacin. The chromosomal integration of resistance genes would make
resistance genes more persistent and could perhaps even lead to an increase
in resistance levels. Thus, many more experiments and trials would be
required to see if an anti-plasmid pre-treatment can be a successful strategy
to increase the efficacy of antibiotic treatment.

Chapter 7 ­ Microbial communities

When a patient receives antibiotic treatment, the effects of this treatment
will not just be limited to infecting pathogenic bacterial cells. The microbial
community inhabiting the patient's gut will also face the antibiotic and will
be forced to adapt to the antibiotic or face extinction. Evolutionary rescue
theory is a modelling framework that has previously been used to describe
the probability that a single bacterial species adapts when it is exposed to an
antibiotic. In Chapter 7, I expand this modelling framework to a multispecies
context. I model a community-wide evolutionary rescue process, with the
aim of understanding how this process changes species abundance

                                                                                                             257
distributions. The model makes several simplifying assumptions, most
importantly it assumes that besides differences in their initial abundance, all
species in the community are ecologically equivalent. Real bacterial
communities obviously have complex ecological interactions, that are
ignored in this model. The model in Chapter 7 is meant to serve as a null
model. Only if the changes in the species abundance distribution observed in
a real-life bacterial community do not match the model predictions, complex
ecological interactions need to be invoked to explain the observed patterns.
The results in Chapter 7 show that community-wide rescue leads to a rapid
loss of rare species. I also show that the mutation rate modulates the degree
of rare-species loss: the higher the mutation rate, the fewer rare species are
lost. In other words, the lower the evolvability of the community with respect
to a certain antibiotic, the larger the number of rare species that will be lost
during the rescue process.

The effect of antibiotic treatment on the gut microbiome can cause
unwanted side effects, such as antibiotic-associated diarrhoea and an
increased risk for gastrointestinal infections. It has been demonstrated that
antibiotic treatment can lead to changes in the gut microbiome that can
persist for months after treatment has ended (Patangia et al., 2022).
Currently, a fully mechanistic and functional understanding of the human gut
microbiome is lacking; we are unable to predict the exact effects an antibiotic
treatment might have, or when side effects will occur. However, we do know
that rare species might be especially important for the functioning of
microbial communities since they can ensure that functioning is maintained
under a broad set of conditions (Jousset et al. 2017). Therefore, maintaining
as much of the rare species in the gut microbiome as possible during
antibiotic treatment might allow us to minimise side effects. Here the
insights from Chapter 7 come in handy. Sequencing-based methods could be
used to quantify the loss of rare species experienced by gut microbial
communities during antibiotic treatment. This allows us to assess the
evolvability of gut microbial communities with respect to different types of
antibiotics. This information about the evolvability of the gut microbiome
should be combined with information about the evolvability of specific

258
pathogens. Compiling this information would allow us to optimise the choice
of antibiotic, choosing an antibiotic to which the gut microbiome can adapt,
whilst the pathogen cannot. Thus we can effectively eliminate the pathogen,
whilst minimising the negative effects of antibiotic treatment on the gut
microbiota. There is likely some degree of trade-off here, if the gut
microbiome can more easily adapt to an antibiotic it is likely a pathogen is
also better able to adapt to said antibiotic. However, even if such a trade-off
exists, the choice of antibiotic can still be optimised along this trade-off. It
should also be noted that the composition of healthy gut microbiomes differs
between individuals, thus when assessing gut microbiome evolvability, one
might also need to account for different types of gut microbial communities
(also called enterotypes) (Rininella et al., 2019). Some words of caution are
due, many labour-intensive clinical experiments would need to be conducted
in order to compile the relevant information. Furthermore, the loss of rare
species can only be used to assess microbiome evolvability if the model in
Chapter 7 is a decent approximation of the microbiome dynamics during
antibiotic treatment. This may not be the case given the simplifying
assumptions this model makes, such as assuming that all species are
ecologically equivalent. However, this assumption of ecological equivalence
may be more reasonable when we divide the microbiome into broad
functional groups. In this case, within a group of microbes performing the
same function, all species could be considered ecologically equivalent. Thus,
instead of estimating the evolvability of the entire microbiome, we could
expand the model in Chapter 7 to estimate the evolvability of certain
functional groups within the microbiome independently. In addition, the
changes in the microbiome during antibiotic treatment may not be the
outcome of an evolutionary rescue process and could just be due to pre-
existing differences in resistance amongst the different species. A good next
step would be to see if the model in Chapter 7 can be used to quantitatively
reproduce the changes in species abundance patterns observed in the gut
microbiome during antibiotic treatment, using already available datasets
(Patangia et al., 2022).

                                                                                                             259
Towards a theory of evolvability and its evolution

In this next section, I will briefly outline what I perceive to be the way forward
for evolutionary biology. I will first argue why I think a theory of evolvability
is essential to advance evolutionary biology. Subsequently, I will explain why
I think that such a theory can best be obtained by taking a mechanistic
approach.

The goal of evolutionary biology is to explain and predict evolutionary
processes. To some extent, current evolutionary theory has been successful
at achieving this goal. Consider for example the numerous animal and plant
breeding programmes that have successfully used quantitative genetics
models to improve yield and disease resistance. However, many evolutionary
models make important simplifying assumptions about the processes that
generate variation that limit their predictive and explanatory power. For
example, most quantitative genetics models make simplifying assumptions
regarding the genetic underpinnings of traits, ignoring the complex gene
regulatory networks underlying traits. In a similar vein, many standard
models simply lack mutational processes altogether. When these processes
are considered, mutation rates are often assumed to be constant. These and
other simplifying assumptions about the processes that generate variation
likely affect the explanatory and predictive power of evolutionary models,
especially on longer timescales. In the short term, the response to selection
is mostly governed by standing genetic variation. On longer timescales,
however, the generation of variation is what ultimately determines
evolutionary trajectories! Consider as an example the outcomes of the
famous Lenski long-term evolution experiment. This elegant experiment
follows the evolution of several bacterial populations originating from a
single clone for thousands of generations as they evolve in a very simple
constant environment (Sniegowski et al., 1997; 2000; Blount, 2016; Tenallion
et al., 2016; Leon et al., 2018). Many of the key findings that have emerged
from this experiment, such as the emergence of elevated mutation rates and
the evolution of citrate metabolism, can only be adequately explained when
the mechanisms underlying the generation of variation are explicitly

260
considered (Sniegowski et al., 1997; 2000; Blount, 2016; Tenallion et al.,
2016; Leon et al., 2018).

By taking into account evolvability, i.e. the capability of biological systems to
undergo adaptive evolution, we can expand the explanatory and predictive
power of evolutionary models. Studying evolvability shifts focus to the
processes that underly the generation of variation. These processes are
currently often neglected but may strongly affect the course and outcome of
evolution. A good example is provided by Milocco & Salazar-Ciudad (2020),
who showed that explicitliy accounting for developmental processes strongly
impacted evolutionary predictions. Furthermore, when we consider
evolvability it becomes evident, that mutation rates are unlikely to be
constant across environments. As I have shown in Chapters 3 and 4 of this
thesis, mutation rates vary depending on the conditions. In other words, a
solid theory of evolvability has the potential to enhance the explanatory and
predictive power of evolutionary models.

Yet, I think the study of evolvability has even more to offer. If one considers
that evolvability is the product of underlying mechanisms, such as the
structure of gene regulatory networks and mutation rates, it becomes
immediately evident that these underlying mechanisms must themselves be
shaped by evolution. In some cases the mechanisms enhancing evolvability
may evolve simply as a side-effect of selection on other traits, in other cases,
evolvability may be the target of selection. For example, there is extensive
evidence that in Lenski's long-term evolution experiment, elevated mutation
rates evolved due to selection for evolvability (Sniegowski et al., 1997; 2000;
Blount, 2016; Tenallion et al., 2016; Leon et al., 2018). I have also observed
the evolution of evolvability in this thesis: In the model in Chapter 4
condition-dependent mutation rates evolve due to selection for evolvability.
In Chapter 5 I showed that the structure of gene regulatory networks can
respond to selection for evolvability, by biasing the phenotypic effects of
mutations towards adaptive outcomes. However, currently the evolution of
evolvability is still poorly understood, with most insights based on simplified
models. Furthermore, the degree to which evolvability mechanisms in

                                                                                                             261
empirical systems are shaped by selection for evolvability remains mostly
unknown. Regardless, to truly enhance current evolutionary theory, we need
to understand how evolvability evolves.

In summary, I think that evolvability is a key concept to enhance the
predictive and explanatory power of evolutionary theory. To obtain long-
term predictions about evolution we need to go beyond merely predicting
what happens when selection acts on variation. We need to understand the
mechanisms that generate and maintain variation. We need to grasp how
the gene regulatory networks shape the phenotypic impact of mutations. We
need to account for the subtle organismal features that shape the process of
selection. In other words, we need a coherent general theory of evolvability
and its evolution. It is therefore not surprising that evolvability plays an
important role in the discussion regarding a potential Extended Evolutionary
Synthesis (EES; Laland et al., 2014; Laland et al., 2015). If such a synthesis
were to come about, I think that evolvability would be one of its most central
concepts, as it relates to a wide array of EES concepts such as mutational
bias, phenotypic plasticity and epigenetic inheritance (Crombach &
Hogeweg, 2008; Laland et al., 2015; Cuypers et al., 2017). However, currently
the extended evolutionary synthesis best be described as a loose
agglomeration of interesting ideas, rather than a coherent synthesis.

So how might the scientific community go about creating a theory of
evolvability and its evolution? I by no means have a definitive answer to this
question. However, given the current state of the art, I consider it unlikely
that a general theory of evolvability and its evolution can easily be created.
The problems at hand are too poorly understood and underlying mechanisms
are too idiosyncratic.

I have shown several times in this thesis that seemingly minor mechanistic
details of biological systems can greatly impact how these systems evolve
and function. For example, I showed in Chapter 3 that the exact type of
antibiotic can influence the relationship between temperature and the
mutation rate towards resistance. Fever temperatures decreased the
mutation rate towards ampicillin resistance, but increased the mutation rate

262
towards ciprofloxacin and rifampicin resistance. In Chapter 4, I considered
the assumption of whether mutation rate loci mutate according to a separate
fixed rate (not self-referent), or mutate according to their own value (self-
referent). This assumption drastically impacted the dynamics and outcome
of evolution: when mutation rate loci mutated in a self-referent manner
evolution proceeded much faster and a condition-dependent mutation
strategy evolved much more frequently. In Chapter 5, I showed that the
nature of gene interactions (linear or non-linear) altered the kind of
mutational transformer that evolved. In Chapter 6, I expected to show the
impact of plasmids on the rate of ciprofloxacin resistance evolution.
However, I failed to foresee that due to its particular mechanism of action
ciprofloxacin would create selection against plasmids. I believe these results
represent a more general truth: when it comes to evolvability, the l devil is
hiding in the mechanistic details. The impact of mechanistic details illustrates
why with the current state of the art developing a general theory on
evolvability is not feasible. Therefore, I think that for now we best resign
ourselves to a mechanistic approach. However, I would argue that this
resignation is perhaps a blessing in disguise: to some extent, it frees us of the
conceptual shackles of previous evolutionary models. I think this freedom is
essential since a theory of evolvability and its evolution might represent a
significant change from current general evolutionary models. Thus for now
we should focus on studying the specific idiosyncratic mechanisms, allowing
a great diversity of mechanistic models to flourish, so that eventually we can
distil solid general principles from a multitude of mechanistic models.
Perhaps, the mechanistic models presented in this thesis could then be
viewed as tiny pebbles paving the road towards a theory of evolvability and
its evolution.

                                                                                                             263
References

Andersson, D. I., Nicoloff, H., & Hjort, K. (2019). Mechanisms and clinical
     relevance of bacterial heteroresistance. Nature Reviews
     Microbiology, 17(8), 479-496.

Arcari, T., Feger, M. L., Guerreiro, D. N., Wu, J., & O'Byrne, C. P. (2020).
     Comparative review of the responses of Listeria monocytogenes and
     Escherichia coli to low pH stress. Genes, 11(11), 1330.

Blount, Z. D. (2016). A case study in evolutionary contingency. Studies in
     History and Philosophy of Science Part C: Studies in History and
     Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, 58, 82-92.

Crombach, A., & Hogeweg, P. (2008). Evolution of evolvability in gene
     regulatory networks. PLoS computational biology, 4(7), e1000112.

Cuypers, T. D., Rutten, J. P., & Hogeweg, P. (2017). Evolution of evolvability
     and phenotypic plasticity in virtual cells. BMC evolutionary biology, 17,
     1-16.

Gaynes, R. (2017). The discovery of penicillin--new insights after more than
     75 years of clinical use. Emerging infectious diseases, 23(5), 849.

Hill, W. G. (2010). Understanding and using quantitative genetic
     variation. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological
     Sciences, 365(1537), 73-85.

Joelsson, A., Kan, B., & Zhu, J. (2007). Quorum sensing enhances the stress
     response in Vibrio cholerae. Applied and environmental microbiology,
     73(11), 3742-3746.

Jousset, A., Bienhold, C., Chatzinotas, A., Gallien, L., Gobet, A., Kurm, V., ...
     & Hol, W. H. (2017). Where less may be more: how the rare biosphere
     pulls ecosystems strings. The ISME journal, 11(4), 853-862.

Laland, K., Uller, T., Feldman, M., Sterelny, K., Müller, G. B., Moczek, A., ... &
     Strassmann, J. E. (2014). Does evolutionary theory need a
     rethink?. Nature, 514(7521), 161-164.

Laland, K. N., Uller, T., Feldman, M. W., Sterelny, K., Müller, G. B., Moczek,
     A., ... & Odling-Smee, J. (2015). The extended evolutionary synthesis:
     its structure, assumptions and predictions. Proceedings of the royal
     society B: biological sciences, 282(1813), 20151019.

264
Lee, A. M., Ross, C. T., Zeng, B. B., & Singleton, S. F. (2005). A Molecular
     Target for Suppression of the Evolution of Antibiotic Resistance:
     Inhibition of the Escherichia coli RecA Protein by N 6-(1-Naphthyl)-ADP.
     Journal of medicinal chemistry, 48(17), 5408-5411.

Leon, D., D'Alton, S., Quandt, E. M., & Barrick, J. E. (2018). Innovation in an
     E. coli evolution experiment is contingent on maintaining adaptive
     potential until competition subsides. PLoS Genetics, 14(4), e1007348.

Mackowiak, P. A., Ruderman, E., Martin, R. M., Many, W. J., Smith, J. W., &
     Luby, J. P. (1981). Effects of physiologic variations in temperature on
     the rate of antibiotic-induced bacterial killing. American journal of
     clinical pathology, 76(1), 57-62.

Martin, G., Aguilée, R., Ramsayer, J., Kaltz, O., & Ronce, O. (2013). The
     probability of evolutionary rescue: towards a quantitative comparison
     between theory and evolution experiments. Philosophical Transactions
     of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 368(1610), 20120088

MacLean, R. C., Torres-Barceló, C., & Moxon, R. (2013). Evaluating
     evolutionary models of stress-induced mutagenesis in bacteria. Nature
     Reviews Genetics, 14(3), 221-227.

Milocco, L., & Salazar-Ciudad, I. (2020). Is evolution predictable?
     Quantitative genetics under complex genotype-phenotype
     maps. Evolution, 74(2), 230-244.

Patangia, D. V., Anthony Ryan, C., Dempsey, E., Paul Ross, R., & Stanton, C.
     (2022). Impact of antibiotics on the human microbiome and
     consequences for host health. MicrobiologyOpen, 11(1), e1260.

Rinninella, E., Raoul, P., Cintoni, M., Franceschi, F., Miggiano, G. A. D.,
     Gasbarrini, A., & Mele, M. C. (2019). What is the healthy gut microbiota
     composition? A changing ecosystem across age, environment, diet, and
     diseases. Microorganisms, 7(1), 14.

Schell-Chaple, H. Fever suppression in patients with infection: State of the
     evidence. Nursing CriticalCare 13(5), 6-13.

Sniegowski, P. D., Gerrish, P. J., & Lenski, R. E. (1997). Evolution of high
     mutation rates in experimental populations of E.
     coli. Nature, 387(6634), 703-705.

                                                                                                             265
Sniegowski, P. D., Gerrish, P. J., Johnson, T., & Shaver, A. (2000). The
     evolution of mutation rates: separating causes from consequences.
     Bioessays, 22(12), 1057-1066.

Tapia, N. C., Dorey, A. L., Gahan, C. G., den Besten, H. M., O'Byrne, C. P., &
     Abee, T. (2020). Different carbon sources result in differential
     activation of sigma B and stress resistance in Listeria monocytogenes.
     International journal of food microbiology, 320, 108504.

Tenaillon, O., Denamur, E., & Matic, I. (2004). Evolutionary significance of
     stress-induced mutagenesis in bacteria. Trends in microbiology, 12(6),
     264-270.

Tenaillon, O., Barrick, J. E., Ribeck, N., Deatherage, D. E., Blanchard, J. L.,
     Dasgupta, A., ... & Lenski, R. E. (2016). Tempo and mode of genome
     evolution in a 50,000-generation experiment. Nature, 536(7615), 165-
     170.

Tueffers, L., Barbosa, C., Bobis, I., Schubert, S., Höppner, M., Rühlemann,
     M., ... & Schulenburg, H. (2019). Pseudomonas aeruginosa populations
     in the cystic fibrosis lung lose susceptibility to newly applied -lactams
     within 3 days. Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, 74(10), 2916-
     2925.

Young, P., Saxena, M., Bellomo, R., Freebairn, R., Hammond, N., van Haren,
     F., ... & Beasley, R. (2015). Acetaminophen for fever in critically ill
     patients with suspected infection. New England Journal of
     Medicine, 373(23), 2215-2224.

266
               Summary

The rise of antibiotic resistance represents a major societal challenge. It has
been estimated that currently, at least 700,000 people die annually because
of antibiotic resistance. According to some estimates, this number may rise
to 10 million by 2050. A better understanding of antibiotic resistance is
crucial to combat this looming threat. In essence, the emergence of antibiotic
resistance is an example of adaptive evolution: when bacteria are faced with
antibiotics this creates a strong selection for resistance. However, luckily for
humans, bacterial populations are not always able to adapt and develop
resistance. What determines if a bacterial population can evolve resistance?
To answer this question, we need to consider "evolvability": the ability of
organisms to undergo adaptive evolution. In this thesis, I therefore study the
evolvability of bacteria in the context of antibiotic resistance. To this end, I
apply a combined experimental and theoretical approach. I strive to gain
general insights about evolvability, whilst at the same time applying these
insights to better understand the evolution of antibiotic resistance.

In Chapter 1, I briefly introduce the concept of evolvability, and I motivate
my definition of evolvability. I also explain and motivate the mechanistic
approach used throughout this thesis. Subsequently, I briefly introduce three
mechanisms underlying the evolvability of bacteria: condition-dependent
mutation rates, the architecture of gene-regulatory networks, and horizontal
gene transfer. All three mechanisms are studied in this thesis.

In Chapter 2, I provide a theoretical framework for understanding
evolvability. This framework outlines how evolvability can be understood
through its underlying mechanisms. I classify the many mechanisms and
organismal features that determine evolvability into three categories:
determinants that provide variation, determinants that shape the
relationship between genetic variation and phenotypic fitness effects, and
determinants that determine how fitness differences lead to evolutionary
change. Each category of determinants shapes evolvability in a different way.
These differences are often not considered, which has led to
miscommunication and confusion in the scientific literature. The proposed

                                                                                                             267
framework also leads to concrete recommendations on how evolvability
should be studied. For example, researchers should specify the timescale on
which the determinant under scrutiny is supposed to act. Moreover, one
should consider the scope of a particular determinant: some determinants
impact adaptation in many different environments, whilst others act only in
a more restricted set of environments.

Chapter 3 addresses the condition dependence of mutation rates. Using
laboratory experiments, I assessed the impact of environmental temperature
on the mutation rate toward antibiotic resistance in the bacterium
Escherichia coli. I show for three different antibiotics that a small
temperature change from 37 °C to 40 °C, as would be associated with fever,
can alter the mutation rate towards resistance by almost an order of
magnitude. For some antibiotics, an increase in temperature led to an
elevated mutation rate, whilst for others this led to a decrease in the
mutation rate. Regardless, antibiotic resistance is expected to evolve much
faster under the temperature at which the mutation rate is the highest. This
highlights a potential new way to mitigate the evolution of antibiotic
resistance by selectively using fever suppression to minimise the mutation
rate towards resistance.

In Chapter 4, I use a simulation model to study whether and when one would
expect the evolution of condition-dependent mutation rates. It has been
hypothesised that an increase in the mutation rate under stressful conditions
enhances evolvability since it provides extra variation during times of
maladaptation, thus accelerating adaptive evolution. I show that stress-
related mutation rates do indeed evolve under a wide array of
circumstances. Furthermore, I show that condition-dependent mutation
rates enhance the ability of populations to adapt to changing environments
and that this evolvability-enhancing effect drives their evolution. These
results illustrate that evolvability can itself evolve.

Interlude 1 shows a modelling contribution that was added to an empirical
study of fat metabolism in certain parasitoid wasps. This study found
empirically that fat metabolism was still maintained within a lineage, even
though it had supposedly been lost millions of generations ago. It turns out

268
that the wasps had maintained the ability to switch on fat metabolism under
certain rarely occurring circumstances. The model explains how such a switch
can evolve to become robust to mutation, allowing phenotypic plasticity to
be maintained even if it is only sporadically exposed to selection.

In Chapter 5, I simulate the evolution of a very simple gene-regulatory
network in a changing environment. I show that the structure of the gene-
regulatory network can easily evolve to bias the phenotypic effect of
mutations towards adaptive outcomes, thereby accelerating adaptation in
the changing environment. I term the underlying mechanism a mutational
transformer: it transforms the phenotypic effects of random genetic
mutations in such a way that they promote an adaptive outcome. Depending
on model details, two different types of transformers evolved in my
simulations. The evolution of mutational transformers shows that
evolvability can evolve through the modification of gene-regulatory
networks.

Chapter 6 reports on an experiment that investigates the impact of
horizontal gene transfer on evolvability in the context of antibiotic
resistance. It has been hypothesised that horizontal gene transfer can
enhance evolvability, for example by bringing together favourable mutations
within a single lineage, which can accelerate adaptation. Using experimental
evolution, I examined the impact of horizontally transferable plasmids on the
de-novo evolution of ciprofloxacin resistance in Lactococcus lactis. During
the 31-day (approximately 200 generations) experiment, the bacterial
populations evolved high-level resistance. Contrary to expectations, the
presence of plasmids did not accelerate the rate of resistance evolution.
However, this outcome may be specific for the experimental system
considered, as plasmid abundance decreased strongly in populations
exposed to ciprofloxacin. Apparently, exposure to ciprofloxacin had created
selection against the plasmid. This serendipitous finding may be of clinical
relevance. Using next-generation sequencing I also analysed the mutations
underlying resistance, revealing several previously unknown genes that may
be involved in resistance.

                                                                                                             269
In Chapter 7, I modelled how species abundances change when a community
of bacteria composed of many different species (for example, a gut
microbiome) is exposed to an antibiotic. I used a modelling framework
known as evolutionary rescue theory. The question was how the pattern of
species abundances in the community changes when each component
species is selected to evolve antibiotic resistance. My simulations show that
a community-wide rescue process leads to the rapid loss of rare species from
the community. This model may help us better understand how bacterial
communities change when exposed to antibiotics.
Chapter 8 constitutes an overarching discussion of this thesis. This chapter
addresses two main themes. First, I consider on a chapter-by-chapter basis
how the insights from this thesis may eventually be applied to improve
antibiotic treatment in a clinical context. Second, I outline my vision for the
future of evolutionary biology. A coherent theory of evolvability and its
evolution is essential to better understand, explain, and predict evolutionary
processes. I argue that such a theory can best be obtained by taking a
mechanistic approach.

270
             Samenvatting

De toename van antibioticaresistentie vormt een grote maatschappelijke
uitdaging. Er wordt geschat dat op dit moment jaarlijks minstens 700.000
mensen sterven als gevolg van antibioticaresistentie. Volgens sommige
schattingen kan dit aantal tegen 2050 zijn opgelopen tot 10 miljoen. Een
beter begrip van antibioticaresistentie is cruciaal om deze dreiging het hoofd
te bieden. In wezen is het ontstaan van antibioticaresistentie een voorbeeld
van adaptieve evolutie: wanneer bacteriën worden geconfronteerd met
antibiotica leidt dit tot een sterke selectie op resistentie. Gelukkig voor de
mens zijn bacteriepopulaties niet altijd in staat om zich aan te passen en
resistentie te ontwikkelen. Wat bepaalt of een bacteriepopulatie resistentie
kan ontwikkelen? Om deze vraag te beantwoorden moeten we kijken naar
"evolueerbaarheid": het vermogen van organismen om adaptieve evolutie te
ondergaan. In dit proefschrift bestudeer ik daarom de evolueerbaarheid van
bacteriën in de context van antibioticaresistentie. Hiervoor gebruik ik een
gecombineerde experimentele en theoretische benadering. Ik streef ernaar
algemene inzichten te verwerven over evolueerbaarheid om hierdoor de
evolutie van antibioticaresistentie beter te begrijpen.

In Hoofdstuk 1 introduceer ik het concept van evolueerbaarheid. Ik verklaar
en motiveer ook de mechanistische benadering die in dit proefschrift
gebruikt wordt. Vervolgens introduceer ik drie mechanismen die ten
grondslag liggen aan de evolueerbaarheid van bacteriën: omgevings-
afhankelijke mutatiesnelheden, de architectuur van genregulatienetwerken
en horizontale genoverdracht. Alle drie de mechanismen worden in dit
proefschrift nader bestudeerd.

In Hoofdstuk 2 geef ik een theoretisch raamwerk voor het begrijpen van
evolueerbaarheid. Dit raamwerk schetst hoe evolueerbaarheid begrepen kan
worden aan de hand van de onderliggende mechanismen. Ik deel de
mechanismen en eigenschappen die evolueerbaarheid bepalen in
verschillende categorieën in: determinanten die variatie verschaffen,
determinanten die de relatie tussen genetische variatie en fenotypische
fitnesseffecten vormgeven, en determinanten die bepalen hoe

                                                                                                             271
fitnessverschillen leiden tot evolutionaire verandering. Elke categorie van
determinanten draagt op een andere manier bij aan evolueerbaarheid. De
verschillende manieren waarop determinanten evolueerbaarheid bepalen
worden vaak niet in beschouwing genomen, wat heeft geleid tot
miscommunicatie en verwarring in de wetenschappelijke literatuur. Het door
mij geschetste raamwerk leidt tot een aantal concrete aanbevelingen over
hoe evolueerbaarheid bestudeerd zou moeten worden. Ten eerste moet
men rekening houden met de tijdschaal waarop bepaalde determinanten
werken. Daarnaast is ook de reikwijdte van een bepaalde determinant
belangrijk: sommige determinanten beïnvloeden adaptatie in veel
verschillende omgevingen, terwijl andere slechts in een beperktere reeks
omgevingen relevant zijn.

Hoofdstuk 3 behandelt de omgevings-afhankelijkheid van
mutatiesnelheden. Met laboratoriumexperimenten heb ik de invloed van
omgevingstemperatuur op de mutatiesnelheid naar antibioticaresistentie in
de bacterie Escherichia coli onderzocht. Ik laat voor drie verschillende
antibiotica zien dat een kleine temperatuurverandering van 37 °C naar 40 °C
(zoals bij koorts), de mutatiesnelheid naar resistentie met een orde van
grootte kan veranderen. Voor sommige antibiotica leidde een verhoging van
de temperatuur tot een verhoogde mutatiesnelheid, terwijl dit voor andere
antibiotica tot een verlaging van de mutatiesnelheid leidde. Hoe dan ook,
antibioticaresistentie zal naar verwachting veel sneller evolueren bij een
hogere mutatiesnelheid. Dit wijst op een mogelijke nieuwe manier om de
evolutie van antibioticaresistentie te beperken door selectief gebruik te
maken van koortsonderdrukking om de mutatiesnelheid naar resistentie te
minimaliseren.

In Hoofdstuk 4 gebruik ik een simulatiemodel om te bestuderen of en
wanneer men de evolutie van toestandsafhankelijke mutatiesnelheden zou
kunnen verwachten. In de literatuur werd de hypothese geopperd dat een
toename in de mutatiesnelheid onder stressvolle omstandigheden de
evolueerbaarheid verbetert, omdat dit in tijden van maladaptatie een
grotere genetische variatie oplevert, waardoor adaptieve evolutie versneld
wordt. Ik laat zien dat stress-gerelateerde mutatiesnelheden inderdaad
evolueren onder een breed scala aan omstandigheden. Verder laat ik zien

272
dat toestandsafhankelijke mutatiesnelheden het vermogen van populaties
om zich aan te passen aan veranderende omgevingen vergroten en dat dit
effect op evolueerbaarheid verantwoordelijk is voor de evolutie van
toestandsafhankelijke mutatiesnelheiden. Deze resultaten illustreren dat
evolueerbaarheid zelf kan evolueren.

Intermezzo 1 toont een modelleringbijdrage die werd toegevoegd aan een
empirische studie naar vetmetabolisme bij bepaalde soorten parasitaire
wespen. Op basis van meerdere studies had men verondersteld dat deze
wespen hun vetmetabolisme al miljoenen generaties geleden kwijt waren
geraakt. Nu bleek uit nieuwe experimenten dat de wespen het vermogen
hadden behouden, maar dat zij hun vetstofwisseling alleen onder bepaalde,
zelden voorkomende omstandigheden inschakelen. Het model verklaart hoe
zo'n zelden gebruikte schakelaar evolutionair behouden kan blijven omdat
deze, via evolutie, robuust wordt voor mutatie. Hierdoor kan deze
fenotypische plasticiteit behouden blijven, zelfs als deze slechts sporadisch
wordt blootgesteld aan selectie.

In Hoofdstuk 5 bestudeer ik met behulp van een simulatiemodel de evolutie
van een genregulatie netwerk in een omgeving die over de generaties sterk
verandert. Ik laat zien dat de structuur van een genregulatie netwerk
gemakkelijk kan evolueren om de fenotypische effecten van mutaties te
beïnvloeden in de richting van adaptieve uitkomsten, hetgeen adaptatie
versnelt. Ik noem het onderliggende mechanisme een mutatietransformator:
het transformeert de fenotypische effecten van willekeurige genetische
mutaties zodanig dat ze een adaptieve uitkomst bevorderen. Afhankelijk van
de details van het model evolueerden er twee verschillende soorten
transformatoren in mijn simulaties. De evolutie van mutatietransformatoren
laat zien dat evolueerbaarheid kan evolueren door de modificatie van
genregulatienetwerken.

In Hoofdstuk 6 bestudeer ik de invloed van horizontale genoverdracht op
evolueerbaarheid in de context van antibioticaresistentie. Er wordt
verondersteld dat horizontale genoverdracht de evolueerbaarheid kan
vergroten, bijvoorbeeld door het samenbrengen van gunstige mutaties,
hetgeen adaptatie kan versnellen. Met behulp van experimentele evolutie

                                                                                                             273
heb ik de invloed onderzocht van een horizontaal overdraagbare plasmide
op de de-novo evolutie van ciprofloxacine resistentie in de bacterie
Lactococcus lactis. Tijdens het experiment van 31 dagen (ongeveer 200
generaties) evolueerden de bacteriële populaties een hoge mate van
resistentie. Tegen de verwachting in versnelde de aanwezigheid van
plasmiden de snelheid van de resistentie-evolutie niet. Dit resultaat kan
echter specifiek zijn voor het experimentele systeem in kwestie, want tijdens
het experiment nam het aantal plasmiden sterk af in populaties die
blootgesteld werden aan ciprofloxacine. Blijkbaar leidde blootstelling aan
ciprofloxacine tot selectie tegen het plasmide. Deze toevallige bevinding kan
van klinisch belang zijn. Met behulp van "next-generation sequencing"
analyseerde ik ook de mutaties die ten grondslag liggen aan resistentie.
Hierbij werden verschillende, voorheen onbekende genen gevonden die
mogelijk betrokken zijn bij resistentie.

In Hoofdstuk 7 heb ik gemodelleerd hoe de soortenrijkdom verandert als een
gemeenschap van bacteriën, die bestaat uit veel verschillende soorten
(bijvoorbeeld een darmmicrobioom), wordt blootgesteld aan een
antibioticum. Ik gebruikte een modelleerraamwerk dat bekend staat als
evolutionaire reddingstheorie. Ik modelleer hoe elke soort in de
gemeenschap onafhankelijk van elkaar antibioticaresistentie ontwikkelt door
mutatie en hoe dit proces de patronen van soortenrijkdom verandert. De
modelresultaten laten zien dat een dergelijk proces leidt tot een zeer snel
verlies van zeldzame soorten uit de gemeenschap. Dit model kan ons helpen
beter te begrijpen hoe bacteriegemeenschappen veranderen wanneer ze
worden blootgesteld aan antibiotica.

Hoofdstuk 8 vormt een overkoepelende discussie van dit proefschrift. Dit
hoofdstuk behandelt twee hoofdthema's. Ten eerste beschouw ik per
hoofdstuk hoe de fundamentele inzichten uit dit proefschrift uiteindelijk
kunnen worden toegepast om de behandeling met antibiotica in een
klinische context te verbeteren. Ten tweede schets ik mijn visie op de
toekomst van de evolutiebiologie. Een coherente theorie van
evolueerbaarheid en de evolutie daarvan is essentieel om evolutionaire
processen beter te begrijpen, te verklaren en te voorspellen. Ik

274
beargumenteer dat zo'n theorie het beste kan worden verkregen door een
mechanistische benadering te kiezen.

                                                                                                             275
         Acknowledgements

First and foremost, I would like to thank my supervisors Franjo, Sander and
Oscar for their support during my PhD.

Franjo, I have learned so much from you. Thank you for having faith in me
and making me a beter scienst, I will take your wise lessons on board for
the rest of my life. I parcularly enjoyed our many discussions where you
applied your sharp mind to a very wide range of topics. Though we each
approach science in a very different way, I would like to think that our
approaches were complementary. I hope that I did not annoy you too much
with my various peculiaries. I connue to be deeply inspired by your
unwavering dedicaon to supporng your students. When things were
difficult or stressful you were always there, always kind, always willing to
listen. I could not have wished for a beter supervisor.

Sander, I aspire to be more like you, your analycal style of thinking
combined with your calm and composed approach make you an amazing
scienst. Whenever I had a queson or an endless discussion with Franjo, you
always calmly considered everything and then with relavely few words
managed to state the core of the mater. These insights greatly improved this
thesis. I especially enjoyed some of the chats we had when I was wring up
the thesis; your office door was always open and your calm advice kept me
sane during those stressful final days. Thank you so much for all your support,
advice, and clear insights.

Oscar, though our interacons were perhaps not as frequent as inially
planned, I greatly enjoyed learning from you. I especially enjoyed working
together trying to resolve the origin of a mystery phage. Your many
interesng stories about the detailed inner workings of bacteria made me
appreciate their complexity. Thank you for allowing me to be part of your
group and providing those praccal ps that greatly improved my
experimental research.

276
Next, a big thank you to my wonderful partner Anja. Without your love and
support, I would not have been able to write this thesis. Thank you for your
kind encouraging words and hugs. Thank you for listening to all my
complaints and supporng me even when I was stressed and difficult. Thank
you for being in my life, I cannot wait to be your husband.

I would also like to thank Mom & Dad. When things were not going as
planned your unwavering support was a great help, you kindly provided a
warm home to which I could always return. Thank you for your wise advice
and for listening to my endless complaining and polical rants. Also, a big
thank you to my brother Mika, your relaxed atude, boundless coin
knowledge and good memes greatly enhance my life. Also thank you for our
bicycle-based adventure and for introducing me to some good music (I am
listening to Fokopolisiekar ­ Anbioka as I am wring this). Dieter, a big
thank you for being an amazing friend, thank you Weird Al and thank you for
berpie siesh and Braap17.4 (as I am wring this I am emailing you a shipping
container full of square lemons with hats). Pedro, thank you for your
encouragement, absolute kindness, your amazing drumming and your
willingness to listen.

Next, I would like to thank my various collaborators. Guillaume, without your
introducon to evoluonary rescue theory this thesis would likely have had
a different topic. Thank you so much for your connued contribuon, your
sense of humour and for hosng me in Montpellier. Stefano & Jana, the
projects on which we collaborated and the discussions we had whilst wring
chapter 2 were a highlight of my PhD. Eleanor & Tomas, I learned a lot of
important lessons from supervising your projects, thank you for being
fantasc students. Barbara, thank you for trusng me with your phage data.
Harma, thank you so much for your support and help during the lab work,
your help was crucial to compleng those projects. Marjon, thank you for
your advice and your infecous enthusiasm for anmicrobial resistance.
Karen, thank you for showing me the wonderful world of spider mites and for
your excellent saxophone playing. Hylke, thanks for the hylkening and your
enthusiasm for lichens. Wout, I admire your strong work ethic, good nature
and excellent sense of humour. Thank you for working on the beetle project

                                                                                                             277
with me. Herman, you are the nicest, most kind and most hardworking
person I have ever met; you make the world a litle beter every day. Thank
you for all the wonderful fossil adventures and the good conversaons. Jelle,
thank you for all the fossil projects and for allowing me on the Winterswijk
dig. Without your encouragement, I would not be where I am today. Rampal,
working with you has made me a beter scienst and person. In the immortal
words of ABBA, thank you for the music, it was a lot of fun and kept me sane.

I would also like to thank all my other friends and colleagues at the University
of Groningen both in the MARM group and beyond, who made my PhD
journey enjoyable, I wish all of you the best. Raph, thank you so much for
your stascal help, good boat pares and sympathec conversaons.
Magdalena, thank you for your well-thought-through comments and
excellent work as NVTB treasurer. Christoph, thank you for your interesng
viewpoints and deep-diving discussions regarding the conduct of science and
other topics. Prak, thank you for providing me with my favourite answer to
the queson "How are you doing?". My answer is and will hopefully be for
the foreseeable future that I am sll alive. Apu & Jakob, thank you for
introducing me to animal personality research and the weird world of
scklebacks. Xiaoyan, thank you for your enthusiasc atude and your
various video recording efforts! Inès, thank you for the good discussions on
plasmids. Mirjam, thank you for your ps regarding thesis prinng. Sergio,
thank you for helping in the lab! Joke, thank you for your computer and data
help and your help managing the lab. Claire & Marina thank you for hosng
very good pares. Albertas, I greatly enjoyed our numerous lunchme
discussions. Thijs & Boris thank you for your down-to-earth atudes.
Ingeborg, thank you so much for all the administrave support, I think the
department would not run without your excellent work! Eva, thanks for some
good philosophical discussions. S.P.A. Nish-inquision is thanked for its
unexpected appearance. Theo, thank you for being one of the quarrymen.
Anni & Cyrus, thank you for teaching me some of the secrets of
microbiological lab work. Bas, thank you for your excellent base playing!
Richèl, thank you for showing me test-based development and showing me
how to build a pi-clock. Jan, thank you for all the good office conversaon,
interesng viewpoints and help whenever I needed a second pair of eyes.

278
Josh, thank you for all the good conversaons about Formula One. I would
also like to thank my friends Simon & Ezra for their support.
I would also like to thank several people who inspired and encouraged me to
pursue a career in science. First, I would like to thank Frank van Nunen &
Hannes Fey, your encouragement and enthusiasm put me on the path to
becoming a biologist. I have very fond memories of vising the biology room
during my me in school. I would also like to thank Alexandre Jousset, for
introducing me to the wonderful world of bacteria. I also owe a debt of
gratude to Bas van de Schootbrugge for your advice about how to build a
career in science and for facilitang my first steps in the right direcon. I
would also like to thank Paulien Hogeweg, your lectures and ideas
transformed the way I think about biology and they connue to inspire me,
as evidenced by some of the chapters from this thesis. I would also like to
thank Oma Nicolete, your can-do enthusiasc atude is very inspiring. I
greatly enjoyed our discussions on the Winterswijk quarry and polics.
Furthermore, a big thank you to Opa & Oma van Eldijk for all their
encouragement over the years. I would also like to thank Opa Ben & Oma
Nity, your encouragement and enthusiasm was part of what led me to
become a scienst. The geologists hammer you gied me connues to be one
of my most prized possessions and connues to inspire me.
Next, I would like to thank those that funded this PhD project. I would like to
thank the Gratama-foundaon (projectnr. 2022-11) for their financial
support which enabled me to do the experiments described in Chapter 6 of
this thesis. Finally a big thank you to all the European taxpayers who funded
this PhD project through the European Research Council (ERC Advanced
Grant No. 789240). I hope you will consider this thesis a worthwhile return
on investment.

                                                                                                             279
          About the author

Timo van Eldijk was born on the 24th of July 1995 in Utrecht, The Netherlands.
Timo completed his high school educaon at the Anna van Rijn College in
Nieuwegein. Here he became fascinated by evoluon, as evidenced by a
rather extensive fossil collecon accrued during this me. He made his first
steps into the academic world in Utrecht in the year 2011, by joining the
Junior College Utrecht. In 2013 Timo started his bachelor's studies in biology
at Utrecht University, which included a brief stay at the University of Bonn to
study the scales of ancient buterflies. Timo received his bachelor's degree in
2016 with the highest disncon. Subsequently, he enrolled in the Erasmus
Mundus Master's Programme in Evoluonary Biology (MEME). It was at this
me that he became parcularly interested in the evoluon of anbioc
resistance. During his master's studies, Timo studied at the University of
Uppsala, the University of Montpellier, and the University of Groningen. In
2018, he graduated with the highest disncon. From 2019 to 2023, Timo
conducted his PhD research at the University of Groningen, resulng in this
PhD thesis. In March 2024, Timo will start as a postdoctoral researcher at the
University of Oldenburg, where he will connue his research into the
evoluon of anbioc resistance.

280
              Publicaon list

Klompmaker*, A. A., Van Eldijk*, T. J. B., Winkelhorst, H., & Reumer, J. W. F. (2023). A non-
marine horseshoe crab from the Middle Triassic (Anisian) of The Netherlands. Netherlands
Journal of Geosciences, 102, e1. (* joint first authorship)

Riederer*, J. M., Tiso*, S., Van Eldijk*, T. J. B., & Weissing, F. J. (2022). Capturing the facets
of evolvability in a mechanisc framework. Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 37(5), 430­439.
(* joint first authorship)

Bisschop, K., Kortenbosch, H. H., Van Eldijk, T. J. B., Mallon, C. A., Falcão Salles, J., Bonte, D.,
& Eenne,R. S. (2022). Microbiome heritability and its role in adaptaon of hosts to novel
resources. Frontiers in Microbiology, 13.

Visser, B., Alborn, H. T., Rondeaux, S., Haillot, M., Hance, T., Rebar, D., Riederer, J. M., Tiso,S.,
Van Eldijk,T. J. B., Weissing, F. J., & Nieberding, C. M. (2021). Phenotypic plascity explains
apparent reverse evoluon of fat synthesis in parasic wasps. Scientific Reports, 11(1), 7751.

Van Eldijk, T. J. B., Bisschop, K., & Eenne, R. S. (2020). Uning community ecology and
evoluonary rescue theory: Community-wide rescue leads to a rapid loss of rare species.
Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution, 8.

Schädel, M., Van Eldijk, T. J. B., Winkelhorst, H., Reumer, J. W. F., & Haug, J. T. (2020).
Triassic Isopoda three new species from Central Europe shed light on the early diversity of
the group. Bulletin of Geosciences, 95(2), 145­166.

Van Eldijk, T. J. B., Heerschop, R., Haarhuis, A., Winkelhorst, H., & Klompmaker, A. A. (2019).
Nonarthropod invertebrates from the Middle Triassic of Winterswijk. Staringia, 16(1), 185­
190.

Van Eldijk, T. J. B., & Wappler, T. (2019). The insects of the Winterswijk Muschelkalk.
Staringia, 16(1), 195­197.

Van Eldijk, T. J. B., Wappler, T., Strother, P. K., van der Weijst, C. M. H., Rajaei, H., Visscher,
H., & van de Schootbrugge, B. (2018). A Triassic-Jurassic window into the evoluon of
Lepidoptera. Science Advances, 4(1), e1701568.

Van Eldijk, T. J. B., Goris, G., Haarhuis, H. F. A., Lankamp, J., Winkelhorst, H., Reumer, J. W.
F., Nel,A., & Wappler, T. (2017). New fossil insects from the Anisian (Lower to Middle
Muschelkalk) from the Central European Basin (Germany and The Netherlands).
Paläontologische Zeitschrift, 91(2), 185­194.

                                                                                                             281
            Author affiliaons

Bisschop, K. - Groningen Instute for Evoluonary Life Sciences, University
of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands
Eenne, R.S. - Groningen Instute for Evoluonary Life Sciences, University
of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands
Kuipers, O.P. - Groningen Biomolecular Sciences and Biotechnology
Instute, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands
Marn, G. - Instut des Sciences de l'Evoluon de Montpellier UMR5554,
Université de Montpellier, CNRS-IRD-EPHE-UM, France
Riederer, J.M. - Groningen Instute for Evoluonary Life Sciences, University
of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands
Sheridan, E.A. - Groningen Instute for Evoluonary Life Sciences,
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands
Tiso, S. - Groningen Instute for Evoluonary Life Sciences, University of
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands
van Doorn, G.S. - Groningen Instute for Evoluonary Life Sciences,
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands
Weissing, F. J. - Groningen Instute for Evoluonary Life Sciences, University
of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands

282
