On the evolution of phenotypic exploration
distributions

Marc Toussaint

Institut f¨ur Neuroinformatik, Ruhr-Universit¨at Bochum, ND 04, 44780 Bochum—Germany
mt@neuroinformatik.ruhr-uni-bochum.de

In Foundations of Genetic Algorithms, Volume 7 (FOGA VII), 169-182, 2003.

Abstract.
In nature, phenotypic variability is highly structured with respect to correla-
tions between diﬀerent phenotypic traits. In this paper we argue that this structuredness
can be understood as the outcome of an adaptive process of phenotypic exploration dis-
tributions, similar to the adaptation of the search distribution in heuristic search schemes
or Estimation-of-Distribution Algorithms. The key ingredient of this process is a non-trivial
genotype-phenotype mapping: We rigorously deﬁne non-triviality, in which case neutral traits
(as a generalization of strategy parameters) inﬂuence phenotype evolution by determining
exploration distributions. Our main result is the description of the evolution of exploration
distributions themselves in terms of an ordinary evolution equation. Accordingly, the “ﬁt-
ness” of an exploration distribution is proportional to its similarity (in the sense of the
Kullback-Leibler divergence) to the ﬁtness distribution over phenotype space. Hence, ex-
ploration distributions evolve such that dependencies and correlations between phenotypic
variables in selection are naturally adopted by the way evolution explores phenotype space.

Keywords: genotype-phenotype mapping, non-trivial neutrality, evolvability, self-adaptation

1

Introduction

Evolution explores a space of creatures (phenotypes) by successive mutation, recombination,
and selection. The exploration is governed by the variational topology of possible mutations
on phenotype space. For many evolutionary algorithms this variational topology is preﬁxed
ad hoc by specifying phenotypic mutation operators. In contrast, in the case of a non-trivial
genotype-phenotype mapping (GP-map), and in particular in nature, phenotypic variational
topology is not ﬁxed. An impressive example has been analyzed by Schuster (1996) and
Fontana & Schuster (1998): Protein folding induces very complex topologies on the space
of secondary protein structures which depend on the genetic representative (i.e., primary
structure) the secondary structure is encoded with. Obviously, the choice of the genetic
representative within a neutral set that encodes for a phenotype decisively determines the
possibilities of phenotypic mutations and innovations. Consequently is has been argued that

Marc Toussaint

FOGA VII, 169-182, 2003

the genetic representations in todays organisms, in particular their complexity with respect
to dependencies, gene interactions, epistatis, etc., are not a mere incident but the outcome
of an adaptive process that optimized these representations with respect to the phenotypic
variability and “innovatability” they induce (Wagner & Altenberg 1996).

To formalize that idea of genetic representations and their inﬂuence on phenotypic variabil-
ity is the basis of this paper. The major result is a description of exactly that adaptive
process that explains the direction of adaptation, i.e., explains why genetic representations
have evolved in nature that encode highly structured and adapted distributions of pheno-
typic variability: The evolution equation that governs the (self-) adaptation of exploration
distributions shows that they are selected with higher probability the better they match the
ﬁtness distribution over phenotype space; in particular they are selected more likely if they
exhibit a correlational structure similar to the correlations between phenotypic variables
in selection. Hence, exploration distributions evolve such that dependencies and correla-
tions between phenotypic variables in selection are naturally adopted by the way evolution
explores phenotype space.

A new formalism for neutrality clariﬁes the conceptual relation to other topics in theoretical
evolutionary computation. We introduce a genotype-phenotype mapping φ such that ﬁtness
(generally any kind of selection relevant character) does only depend on the phenotype;
two genotypes are called equivalent if they have the same phenotype. Such an equivalence
relation is related to a projection similar to schemata or coarse grainings (Radcliﬀe 1991;
Stephens & Waelbroeck 1999). The question is whether this projection is compatible with
evolution dynamics, i.e., whether “coarse-grained” evolution can be described without track-
ing microscopic traits (Vose 1999, chapter 17). We deﬁne a genotype-phenotype mapping
non-trivial iﬀ phenotype equivalence is not compatible, i.e., when phenotype evolution can-
not be understood (i.e., modeled) without tracking neutral traits. We prove that this is the
case whenever phenotypic mutation probabilities depend on neutral traits—vice versa, the
“only” impact of neutral traits on phenotype evolution is that they determine exploration
distributions. This leads to the embedding of neutral sets in the space of exploration distri-
butions. Eventually, this formalism allows to derive the evolution equation for exploration
distributions.

Section 2 introduces the formalism of phenotype equivalence and discusses in general terms
under which conditions phenotype evolution depends on neutral traits. Section 3 is an
extended discussion of our approach and relations to various topics in evolutionary com-
putation, e.g., the concept of self-adaptation, strategy parameters, and evolving genetic
representations. Section 4 describes the embedding of neutral traits in a larger space of
exploration distributions appropriate to formulate an evolution equation for them. Section
5 then derives this equation, which we call σ-evolution. The equation exhibits a delay eﬀect
of evaluation of exploration traits which is well-known for conventional strategy parame-
ters and which we generalize to n-th order delay eﬀects in the appendix. A brief summary
concludes.

2 Phenotype equivalence: When does phenotype evo-

lution depend on neutral traits?

The following notation is adapted from Vose (1999, chapter 17). Let Ω denote the space
of genotypes; which may be any space, e.g., the space of strings of arbitrary length, trees,
or grammars, or even the union of these spaces (which would allow a self-adaptive “change
of representation”, see later sections). We interpret evolution as discrete-time stochastic
dynamics of a population p(t) of genotypes. At every time t, p(t) ∈ ΛΩ evolves as

p(t+1) = G p(t) ,

Marc Toussaint

FOGA VII, 169-182, 2003

where G : ΛΩ → ΛΩ is the evolution operator deﬁned on the space (simplex) ΛΩ of dis-
In the ﬁnite population case, p(t) is a normalized ﬁnite sum of delta-
tributions over Ω.
distributions and G is stochastic (due to sampling); here we keep to the inﬁnite population
approach, where the population is an arbitrary point in the simplex and G is deterministic.
Later, we will assume that G is composed of a mutation and a selection operator, the latter
of which depends on a ﬁtness function f : Ω → R.

Phenotype equivalence. Let ˜Ω be a phenotype space and φ : Ω → ˜Ω a surjective genotype-
phenotype map (GP-map) such that ﬁtness depends only on the phenotype, f (g) = ˜f (φ(g)),
˜f : ˜Ω → R. Generally, φ may be non-injective. We deﬁne two genotypes g1 and g2 equivalent
iﬀ they have the same phenotype,

g1 ≡ g2 ⇐⇒ φ(g1) = φ(g2) .

The set of equivalence classes Ω/ ≡ is one-to-one with the set ˜Ω = φ(Ω) = {φ(g)|g ∈ Ω} of
phenotypes. Thus, we use the phenotype x ∈ ˜Ω to indicate an equivalence class

[x] := φ−1(x) = {g ∈ Ω | φ(g) = x} ,

which is also called neutral set or phenotypic class. As we map genotypes on phenotypes,
we can also map genotype populations on phenotype populations: The mapping Ξ projects
genotype distributions to distributions on the phenotype space,

Ξ : ΛΩ → Λ ˜Ω : p (cid:55)→ Ξp , Ξp (x) =

p(g) .

(cid:88)
g∈[x]

(1)

By this projection, the equivalence relation carries over to distributions in ΛΩ: two distri-
butions p1, p2 are called equivalent iﬀ they induce the same distribution over the phenotype
space,

p1

≡ p2 ⇐⇒ Ξp1 = Ξp2 .
(cid:98)

Again, the quotient space ΛΩ/
Λ ˜Ω of distributions over the phenotype space.

≡ of equivalence classes in ΛΩ is one-to-one with the space
(cid:98)

Compatibility. Based on this formalism we investigate the following question: When G
describes the evolutionary process on the genotype level and if we observe only the projected
process on the phenotype level, can we model the phenotypic evolution process without
reference to the genotype level? I.e., is the genotype level irrelevant for understanding the
phenotypic process? Formally, this amounts to whether G is compatible with ≡ or not: An
operator G : ΛΩ → ΛΩ is compatible with an equivalence relation ≡ iﬀ

p1

≡ p2 =⇒ G(p1)
(cid:98)

≡ G(p2) ,
(cid:98)

which is true iﬀ there exists an operator ˜G such that the diagram

ΛΩ
Ξ

(cid:121)
Λ ˜Ω

G−→ ΛΩ
Ξ

˜G−→ Λ ˜Ω
(cid:121)

(2)

(3)

commutes, i.e., Ξ ◦ G = ˜G ◦ Ξ. This means that, in the case of compatibility, one can deﬁne
a process ˜G : Λ ˜Ω → Λ ˜Ω solely on the phenotypic level that equals the projected original
process G: ˜G represents the phenotypic version of evolutionary dynamics and the population
Ξp of phenotypes evolves independent of the neutral traits within the genotype population
p. Accordingly, we make the following deﬁnition:

Marc Toussaint

FOGA VII, 169-182, 2003

Deﬁnition 2.1 (Trivial neutrality, trivial genotype-phenotype mapping). Given a
genotype space Ω, an evolutionary process G : ΛΩ → ΛΩ, and a genotype-phenotype map-
ping φ : Ω → ˜Ω, we deﬁne the GP-map to be trivial iﬀ phenotype equivalence ≡ commutes
with the evolutionary process G. In that case we also speak of trivial neutrality.

The meaning of this deﬁnition should become clear from the deﬁnition of compatibility: In
the case of trivial neutrality, the evolution of phenotypes can be completely understood (i.e.,
modeled) without referring at all to genotypes, in particular, neutral traits are completely
irrelevant for the evolution of phenotypes. Based on this formalism we can derive exact
conditions for the case of trivial neutrality:
Theorem 2.1. Let the evolution operator G = F M be composed of selection and mutation
only (no crossover), and let M be given by the conditional probability M(g(cid:48)|g) of mutating a
genotype g into g(cid:48). Then, neutrality is trivial iﬀ

∀x ∈ ˜Ω : g1, g2 ∈ [x] ⇒ ΞM(·|g1) = ΞM(·|g2) .

In other words, neutrality is non-trivial if and only if there exists at least one neutral set
[x] such that the projected exploration distribution ΞM(·|g) ∈ Λ ˜Ω is non-constant over this
neutral neutral set (i.e., diﬀers for diﬀerent g ∈ [x]).
(The footnote1 explains the · notation.)

Proof. Since selection depends only on phenotypes it is obvious that the selection operator
F commutes with phenotype projection. The composition of two compatible operators is
also compatible (Vose 1999, Theorem 17.4). Hence, we need to focus only on the mutation
operator M:

Let us consider the mutational process given by

p(t+1)(g(cid:48)) =

(cid:88)
g

M(g(cid:48)|g) p(t)(g)

Following deﬁnition (2) of compatibility we investigate what happens under projection Ξ:

Ξp(t+1)(x(cid:48)) =

(cid:88)
g(cid:48)∈[x(cid:48)]

(cid:88)
g

M(g(cid:48)|g) p(t)(g) =

(cid:88)
g

(cid:88)
g(cid:48)∈[x(cid:48)]

M(g(cid:48)|g) p(t)(g) =

ΞM(x(cid:48)|g) p(t)(g) .

(cid:88)
g

We distinguish two cases:

First case: For all neutral sets [x], let ΞM(·|g) be constant over the neutral set, i.e., inde-
pendent of g ∈ [x], and we can write ΞM(·|g) = ΞM(·|x). It follows:

Ξp(t+1)(x(cid:48)) =

(cid:88)
x

(cid:88)
g∈[x]

ΞM(x(cid:48)|g) p(t)(g) =

ΞM(x(cid:48)|x)

(cid:88)
x

p(t)(g) =

(cid:88)
x

(cid:88)
g∈[x]

ΞM(x(cid:48)|x) Ξp(t)(x) .

M given by ΞM(x(cid:48)|x).
(cid:101)

Hence, M is compatible with phenotype equivalence; the diagram (3) commutes with the
“coarse-grained” mutation operator
Second case: Let there exist at least one neutral set [x] with diﬀerent genotypes g1, g2 ∈ [x]
such that the corresponding projected exploration distributions are not equal, ΞM(·|g1) (cid:54)=
ΞM(·|g1). Further, consider the two single genotype populations p(t)
2 (g) =
δg,g2 , which are phenotypically equivalent, Ξp(t)
2 . Their projected oﬀspring popula-
tions though are diﬀerent: Ξp(t+1)
= ΞM(·|g2). Hence, in the second
2
case M is not compatible with phenotype equivalence.

1 = Ξp(t)
= ΞM(·|g1) (cid:54)= Ξp(t+1)

1 (g) = δg,g1 and p(t)

1

1We use the · as a “wild card” for a function argument. E.g., given a function f : R2 → R : (x, y) (cid:55)→
f (x, y), if we want to ﬁx y and consider the function on that hyperplane, we write f (·, y) : R → R : x (cid:55)→
f (x, y). Accordingly, for a conditional probability we write M : Ω → ΛΩ : g (cid:55)→ M(·|g) ∈ ΛΩ.

Marc Toussaint

FOGA VII, 169-182, 2003

3 Behind this formalism

The variability of variational topology.
We introduced M(g(cid:48)|g) as the conditional probability distribution describing mutations from
g to g(cid:48). Actually, this mutation probability is the only “structure” given on Ω; there exists
no other relevant a priori topological or metric structure. I call it the variational structure
on Ω and often it is associated with a variational topology on Ω, where g(cid:48) may be deﬁned a
neighbor of g if the transition probability M(g(cid:48)|g) is greater than some lower bound (Stadler,
Stadler, Wagner, & Fontana 2001). Fundamental aspects of evolutionary transitions are
often discussed in terms of the variational topology (Schuster 1996; Fontana & Schuster
1998; Reidys & Stadler 2002), and we will also use this intuitive language.

The role of the projection Ξ becomes more evident: while M(·|g) describes the variational
structure on Ω, its projection ΞM(·|g) describes the variational structure on ˜Ω. The pro-
jection Ξ may be interpreted as a lift of variational structure from the genotype space onto
the phenotype space—similar to the lift of a metric structure from a base space onto a
Riemannian manifold. There is, however, a crucial diﬀerence: the GP-map φ need not be
one-to-one. If φ is non-injective, there exist diﬀerent genotypes gi that map to the same
phenotype; and thus there exist diﬀerent neighborhoods Ugi that map to potentially diﬀer-
ent neighborhoods of the same phenotype. Hence, the variational topology on phenotype
space is generally not ﬁxed but variable and depends on the genotypic representation gi that
induces the topology!

On evolving genetic representations.

The GP-map is commonly been thought of “the choice of representation”. When applying
evolutionary algorithms for problem solving, this choice of representation is usually crucial
for the algorithm’s eﬃciency. Even if one has two isomorphic representations, their eﬀects
on evolution may be very diﬀerent since the algorithm’s designer will usually deﬁne the
mutation operators according to a seemingly natural topology on that representation (like
the hypercube topology on bit strings). A common but misleading conclusion is that adapt-
ability of exploration strategies requires an adaptability of the GP-map (Altenberg 1995;
Wagner & Altenberg 1996). However, as our formalism clariﬁes, adaptability of exploration
can be achieved by a ﬁxed, but non-trivial genotype-phenotype mapping. In this case, a
variation of exploration strategy does not occur by varying the GP-map but by neutral
variations in the genotype space. For example, the genotype space may be considered very
large, comprising all thinkable genetic representations of phenotypes (strings and trees and
grammars, etc.). In that case, diﬀerent neutral traits literally correspond to diﬀerent ge-
netic representations—such that a neutral variation allows for a change of representation
although the genotype-phenotype map as a whole remains ﬁxed. Of course, this presumes
that there exist possible neutral mutations between these representations—in the case of
the artiﬁcial evolution of strings, trees, and grammars, this can be realized and is subject to
current research (Toussaint 2001). (See also the symbiotic composition approach (Watson &
Pollack 2002).) In the case of natural evolution, the neutral transition from RNA to DNA
genomes in early evolution is a corresponding paradigm. In contrast, a self-adaptation of the
whole genotype-phenotype mapping hardly makes sense because it is generally inconsistent
to speak of a mapping from genotype to phenotype being parameterized by the genotype.

Strategy parameters as a special case.

In a less formal account (Toussaint & Igel 2002) we already discussed the implications of an
exploration distribution M(·|g) that depends on neutral traits (i.e., genotypic representations

Marc Toussaint

FOGA VII, 169-182, 2003

g ∈ [x] in a given neutral set):
It allows the exploration strategy (e.g., the variational
topology) to self-adapt.
In traditional approaches, in particular evolution strategies, so-
called strategy parameters play the part of neutral traits—strategy parameters are a direct
parameterization of mutation operators which are themselves part of the genotype (Angeline
1995; Smith & Fogarty 1997). In these approaches, the genotype space is a Cartesian product
Ω = ˜Ω × Z of the phenotype space and the space Z of neutral strategy parameters. In some
sense, our formalism generalizes the concept of strategy parameters to the case where the
genotype space can not be decomposed into a product of phenotype and strategy parameter
spaces but consists of arbitrarily interweaved neutral sets.

Examples.

Assume that we encode (phenotype) strings of length n by (genotype) strings of length n+1,
such that the GP-map simply ignores the genotype’s last symbol. Obviously, this encoding
is non-injective. But what is more important is that neutrality is trivial in that case, i.e., G
commutes with Ξ. Hence, the encoding really is redundant—the additional bit has no eﬀect
whatsoever on phenotype evolution. Many investigations that aim to argue against neutral
encodings actually only investigate such trivial neutrality; they forget that neutrality (in
their terms “redundancy”) can have an absolute crucial impact on phenotypic variability in
the case of a non-trivial GP-map.

In contrast, non-trivial neutrality is implicit in many models of evolutionary computation.
Evolution strategies that make use of strategy parameters are the most basic paradigm,
which we have already mentioned. But non-trivial neutrality occurs also in many other
models. An excellent example are grammar-like genotype-phenotype mappings. Here, the
same ﬁnal phenotype can be represented by diﬀerent sets of “developmental” rules. De-
pending on this representation, exploration in the space of phenotypes is very diﬀerent. The
example given in the footnote2 nicely demonstrates the variability of variational topology
on the phenotype space. In (Toussaint 2001), neutral variations between such equivalent
grammar-type representations have been introduced and proved eﬃcient.

Evolvability.

All of this is strongly related to the discussion of evolvability in the biology literature. Many
discussions are based on some relation between neutrality and evolvability (Schuster 1996;
Kimura 1983) but to my knowledge there hardly exists a generic theoretical formalism to
investigate such issues. (Analytical approaches to describe canalization, i.e. the evolution of
mutational robustness of certain characters, based on neutral variations have been proposed
by Rice (1998) and Wagner, Booth, & Bagheri-Chaichian (1997).) Following Wagner &
Altenberg (1996), evolvability denotes the capability to explore further and further good
individuals during evolution, which seems possible only when the exploration strategy itself
is adapted in favor of evolvability during evolution. In our formalism this raises the question
of how neutral traits, and thereby exploration distributions, do actually evolve. We will
propose an answer to this question in section 5, which requires the formalism introduced in
the next section.

2Let the string abab be represented (1.) by the grammar {start-symbol→x, x→ab} or (2.) by the grammar
{start-symbol→abab}. If mutations are only rhs symbol ﬂips, then the phenotypic variational neighbors of
abab are either (1.) {*, *b*b, a*a*} or (2.) {*bab, a*ab, ab*b, aba*}, where * means a symbol ﬂip. These are
quite diﬀerent topologies! See (Toussaint 2001, chapter 5) for details.

Marc Toussaint

FOGA VII, 169-182, 2003

4 Embedding neutral sets in the variety of exploration

distributions

Our goal is to describe the evolution of neutral traits and thereby the evolution of exploration
distributions M(·|g). In simple cases where the genotype space decomposes, Ω = X × Z,
there seems no conceptual diﬃculty to do this: the evolutionary process as described on the
genotype space may be projected on the hyperplane Z. This is the case for conventional
strategy parameters and enabled Beyer (2001) to even derive analytical solutions for this
process. However, since in general neutral traits live in arbitrarily interweaved neutral sets
it seems tedious to ﬁnd a description of their evolution. We are missing some embedding
space to formulate equations—this actually reﬂects that we are missing a uniform way of
interpreting and modeling neutral traits.

We now propose such an embedding. To simplify the notation let us “not distinguish”
between two genotypes g1, g2 ∈ [x] which induce the same exploration distribution M(·|g1) =
M(·|g2) ∈ ΛΩ. Formally, this means that we deﬁne another equivalence relation. Not
distinguishing equivalent g’s means considering only the evolution equation on the respective
quotient space. It is clear the M commutes with this equivalence and of course also selection
does. Since these circumstances are rather obvious we skip introducing formal symbols and,
from now on, just assume that all g’s in [x] induce diﬀerent distributions M(·|g).

Thus, there exists an bijection between [x] and the set

[x] = {M(·|g) | g ∈ [x]} ⊂ ΛΩ

of exploration distributions. It is this bijection that we want to emphasize because it deﬁnes
an embedding of neutral sets in the space of exploration distributions. Speciﬁcally, it deﬁnes
an embedding of the non-decomposable genotype space Ω in a product space of “Phenotype
× Distribution”:

Deﬁnition 4.1 (σ-embedding). Given a genotype space Ω, a genotype-phenotype map-
ping φ : Ω → ˜Ω, and a mutation operator M : Ω → ΛΩ, we deﬁne the σ-embedding
as:

Ω → ˜Ω × ΛΩ : g (cid:55)→ (x, σ) =

φ(g), M(·|g)

.

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

(4)

The embedding space is ¯Ω = ˜Ω × ΛΩ. Note that this mapping is injective (but of course
not surjective) and thus there exists a one-to-one relation between the genotype space Ω
and the subset {(x, σ) | x ∈ ˜Ω, σ ∈ [x]} ⊂ ¯Ω. The injectiveness allows to directly associate a
genotype distribution p ∈ ΛΩ with a distribution over ¯Ω by

p(x, σ) = (cid:40)

0
p(g)

if σ (cid:54)∈ [x]
if σ ∈ [x], x = φ(g), and σ = M(·|g) .

(5)

The product structure of the embedding space is the key to formulate the evolution equation
of exploration distributions in the next section. The embedding also oﬀers a new formal way
of modeling neutral traits as specifying an exploration distribution σ ∈ [x]; the neutral set
[x] being nothing but an isomorphic copy of the space [x] ⊂ ΛΩ of exploration distributions.

5 σ-evolution: The evolution of exploration

How in principle can the exploration distribution be adapted in order to allow for evolv-
ability, i.e., successful exploration? There seems to be a hidden consensus in the class

Marc Toussaint

FOGA VII, 169-182, 2003

of so-called Estimation-of-Distribution Algorithms (EDAs) (Pelikan, Goldberg, & Cant´u-
Paz 2000; M¨uhlenbein, Mahnig, & Rodriguez 1999; Baluja & Davies 1997). All of these
approaches use probabilistic models (Bayesian networks, dependency trees, or factorized
distributions instead of population and mutation operators) to directly describe the ex-
ploration distribution. Their strategy to adapt this distribution is straightforward: in the
forthcoming exploration, make solutions more probable that have been selected currently.
This means that the exploration distribution has been adapted to become “more similar”
to the distribution of selected solutions. Formally, such similarity can be captured by a
distance measure in the space of distributions, the relative entropy or Kullback-Leibler di-
vergence. In fact, Pelikan, Goldberg, & Cant´u-Paz (2000) directly work with a variant of the
Kullback-Leibler divergence speciﬁcally deﬁned on their Bayesian models. These approaches
are by no means self-adaptive, adaptation occurs by an explicit (“external”) algorithm, not
implicitly by evolutionary selection. Could the mere interaction of mutation and selection
induce a similar kind of adaptation of exploration? We will argue so in the following.

Let us write the evolution equation for mutation and selection as

p(t+1)(g(cid:48)) =

f (t)(g(cid:48))
¯f (t)

(cid:88)
g∈Ω

M(g(cid:48)|g) p(t)(g) .

(6)

We embed the equation in ¯Ω and, according to equations (4) and (5), identify the exploration
distribution M(x(cid:48), σ(cid:48)|g) with σ(x(cid:48), σ(cid:48)),

p(t+1)(x(cid:48), σ(cid:48)) =

˜f (t)(x(cid:48))
¯f (t)

(cid:88)
x∈ ˜Ω

(cid:88)
σ∈ΛΩ

σ(x(cid:48), σ(cid:48)) p(t)(x, σ) .

This allows to run the summation over all possible distributions σ ∈ ΛΩ; note that σ (cid:54)∈ [x] ⇒
p(t)(x, σ) = 0. We now beneﬁt from ¯Ω being a product space: The summations commute
and executing summation over x gives

p(t+1)(x(cid:48), σ(cid:48)) =

˜f (t)(x(cid:48))
¯f (t)

(cid:88)
σ

σ(x(cid:48), σ(cid:48)) p(t)(σ) .

Here, p(t)(σ) is the marginal distribution of p(t)(x, σ), well deﬁned because ¯Ω = ˜Ω × ΛΩ is
a product space. Summing over x(cid:48) and decomposing the mutation probability σ(x(cid:48), σ(cid:48)) =
σ(x(cid:48)|σ(cid:48)) σ(σ(cid:48)) we ﬁnally get

p(t+1)(σ(cid:48)) =

(cid:80)x(cid:48) ˜f (t)(x(cid:48)) σ(x(cid:48)|σ(cid:48))
¯f (t)

(cid:88)
σ

σ(σ(cid:48)) p(t)(σ) .

We summarize this in

Theorem 5.1 (σ-evolution). Given the evolutionary process (6) on the genotype space Ω,
the evolution of exploration distributions is described by the projection of the process on ΛΩ
given by the σ-evolution equation

p(t+1)(σ(cid:48)) =

˜f (t) , σ(·|σ(cid:48))
(cid:11)
(cid:10)
¯f (t)

(cid:88)
σ

σ(σ(cid:48)) p(t)(σ) ,

(7)

where

f , g
(cid:10)

(cid:11)

:=

(cid:80)x(cid:48)∈ ˜Ω f (x(cid:48)) g(x(cid:48)) denotes the scalar product in the function space L2.

σ-evolution describes the transition of a parent population p(t)(σ) of exploration distribu-
tions to the oﬀspring population p(t+1)(σ(cid:48)) of exploration distributions. Therein, the term
σ(σ(cid:48)) corresponds to the mutation operator on ΛΩ (recall that σ(x(cid:48), σ(cid:48)) corresponds to a

Marc Toussaint

FOGA VII, 169-182, 2003

mutation distribution M(x(cid:48), σ(cid:48)|g)), and the equation matches the standard evolution equa-
tion in the form “p(t+1) = F M p(t)”. In the following we discuss three aspects of the most
interesting part of this equation, the ﬁtness term

˜f (t) , σ(·|σ(cid:48))
(cid:10)

.
(cid:11)

The scalar product as quality measure. A term
is a measure for σ that we call
σ-quality. In the ﬁrst place, it is the scalar product of ˜f (t) with σ in the space of functions
over ˜Ω. The scalar product is a measure of the similarity and thus, σ-quality measures the
similarity between the exploration distribution and ﬁtness. σ-quality is very similar to the
concept of eﬀective ﬁtness (Nordin & Banzhaf 1995; Stephens & Vargas 2000).

(cid:10)

(cid:11)

˜f (t) , σ

(cid:10)

˜f (t) , σ(·|σ(cid:48))

¯f (t) is actually
A delay eﬀect. However, equation (7) exhibits that the term
the ﬁtness term for the oﬀspring σ(cid:48). Thus, the ﬁtness one has to associate with an oﬀspring
is the σ-quality of its parent under the condition that σ has in fact generated the oﬀspring σ(cid:48)
(σ(·|σ(cid:48)) is the parent’s phenotypic exploration distribution). Roughly speaking, the oﬀspring
is selected according to the quality of its parent. This circumstance can be coined a ﬁrst
order delay of evaluation. The quality of an individual’s exploration distribution is not
rewarded immediately by higher selection probability of this individual itself. It is rewarded
when its oﬀspring are selected with higher probability. This delay eﬀect is well-known in the
context of evolution strategies, see the footnote.3 With our formalism it is straightforward to
generalize it to arbitrary degrees of equivalence leading to n-th order delay, see the appendix.

(cid:11)(cid:14)

The information theoretic interpretation. Since σ is actually a probability distribution
we can also give an information theoretic interpretation. Let us introduce the exponential
ﬁtness distribution as

F (t) =

exp ˜f (t)
C (t)

, C (t) =

(cid:88)
x(cid:48)

exp ˜f (t)(x(cid:48)) .

One would also call F (t) the soft-max or Boltzmann distribution of ˜f (t). σ-quality can now
be rewritten as

˜f (t) , σ
(cid:10)

(cid:11)

+ ln C (t) =

(cid:88)
x(cid:48)

σ(x(cid:48)) ln F (t)(x(cid:48)) = −D

F (t)

(cid:1)

σ

(cid:0)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

− H(σ) ,

where D denotes the relative entropy or Kullback-Leibler divergence 4 between two distribu-
tions, and H the entropy,

D

p

(cid:0)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

=

q

(cid:1)

(cid:88)
x

p(x) ln

p(x)
q(x)

, H(p) = −

p(x) ln p(x) .

(cid:88)
x

3For evolution strategies it is a common approach to ﬁrst mutate the strategy parameters z before mu-
tating the objective variables x according to the new strategy parameters (Schwefel 1995; B¨ack 1998). In our
formalism this means that in equation (7) the evaluated distribution σ(·|σ(cid:48)) = ΞM(·|x, z(cid:48)) is “similar” (with
same strategy parameter z(cid:48)) to the oﬀspring’s distribution Ξσ(cid:48)(·) = ΞM(·|x(cid:48), z(cid:48)). However, the evaluated
and the oﬀspring’s exploration distributions still diﬀer signiﬁcantly because they depend on the objective
variables x and x(cid:48), respectively. It is thus questionable to state that this method cancels the delay eﬀect:
the real σ-quality of strategy parameters z(cid:48) becomes evident only in the next generation in combination with
the oﬀspring’s objective parameters x(cid:48).

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

q

p

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

4Relative entropy D

is a measure for the loss of information (or gain of entropy) when a “true”
distribution p is represented (approximated) by a model distributions q. For example, when p(x, y) is
approximated by p(x) p(y) one loses information on the mutual dependence between x and y. Accordingly,
is equal to the mutual information between x and y. Generally,
the relative entropy D
If,
when knowing the real distribution p, one needs on average H(p) bits to describe a random sample.
however, one knows only an approximate model q, then one will need on average H(p) + D
bits to
describe a random sample. The loss of knowledge about the true distribution induces an increase of entropy
and thereby an increase of description length for random samples.

p(x) p(y)

p(x, y)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

p

q

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

Marc Toussaint

FOGA VII, 169-182, 2003

Hence, σ-quality is proportional to the negative of the divergence between the exploration
distribution σ and the exponential ﬁtness distribution F (t) minus the entropy of exploration.
We summarize this:

Corollary 5.2. The evolution of exploration distributions (σ-evolution) naturally has a se-
lection pressure towards

– minimizing the KL-divergence between exploration and the exponential ﬁtness distri-

bution, and

– minimizing the entropy of exploration.

This also means that, assuming ﬁxed entropy of σ, the exponential ﬁtness distribution
is a ﬁx point of σ-evolution that corresponds to the quasispecies (Eigen, McCaskill, &
Schuster 1989). We aimed at this interpretation because we ﬁnd it establishes a bridge
to numerous approaches and discussions already present in the literature. First of all we
understand the relation between self-adaptive σ-evolution and the deterministic adaptation
schemes of the exploration distribution in Estimation-of-Distribution Algorithms (Pelikan,
Goldberg, & Cant´u-Paz 2000; Baluja & Davies 1997; M¨uhlenbein, Mahnig, & Rodriguez
1999). Actually, σ-evolution realizes a similar kind of adaptation—minimization of the
Kullback-Leibler divergence between exploration and ﬁtness—but in a self-adaptive way.

Further, the question of how variational properties evolve has also been raised in numerous
variations (pleiotropy, canalization, epistatis, etc.) in the biology literature. These discus-
sions aim at understanding how evolution can handle to introduce correlations or mutational
robustness or functional modularity in phenotypic exploration. Our answer is that varia-
tional properties evolve as to approximate the selection distribution. If, for example, certain
phenotypic traits are correlated in the selection distribution F , then the Kullback-Leibler
divergence decreases if these correlations are also present in the exploration distribution σ.

6 Summary

Why have we applied Vose’s formalism of compatibility? The literature is full of discussions
on the purpose or relevance of neutrality or redundancy in genetic representations. There
is a lack of a formal basis on which to ground these discussions. The approach to formalize
neutrality by means of equivalence classes is not new—but the strict application of simple
and fundamental arguments concerning the compatibility of G with phenotype equivalence
allows to derive under which conditions neutrality inﬂuences phenotype evolution: non-
dependence of (projected) mutation on neutral traits is equivalent to compatibility of the
evolution equation with phenotype equivalence, which we termed trivial neutrality.

Why have we introduced the σ-embedding of neutral traits? For a description of the evo-
lution of neutral traits it is essential to have an embedding space in which to formulate
In simple cases where the genotype space decomposes (strategy
the evolution equation.
parameters) an embedding space of neutral sets is obvious. To generalize to arbitrary neu-
tral sets and arbitrary genotype-phenotype mappings we introduced the σ-embedding, i.e.,
we embedded neutral sets in the space of probability distributions over the genotype space
(exploration distributions).

Finally, what have we learned about σ-evolution? We derived an evolution equation for
exploration distributions. The selection term can be interpreted as a ﬁtness of exploration
distributions that measures the (scalar product) similarity to the ﬁtness function. In terms
of information theory, σ-evolution minimizes the Kullback-Leibler divergence between the
exploration distribution and the exponential (Boltzmann) ﬁtness distribution, and minimizes

the entropy of exploration. We argued that this result provides a bridge between heuris-
tic search approaches to adaptation, conventional self-adaptation, and theoretical biology
concerning the origin of epistatis.

Appendix — n-th order equivalence and n-th order delay

How could we consider also higher order delays? Eventually, how could evolution arrange to
increase the probability for children to generate with high probability children that generate
with high probability ...et cetera... children with high ﬁtness. We propose the following. What
we considered up to now was the case when two genotypes g1, g2 are equivalent, g1 ≡ g2,
because they share the same phenotype. As a result we found a ﬁrst order delay of selection
of neutral characters. Now consider the case when two genotypes are 2nd order equivalent
because their phenotypes are the same, g1 ≡ g2, and their phenotypic explorations are the
≡ σ2. Then, these two exploration distributions have, in fact, the
same, Ξσ1 = Ξσ2, i.e. σ1
same σ-quality and there is no immediate diﬀerence in selection between them. However,
(cid:98)
when writing equation (7) for two time steps we ﬁnd

p(t+2)(σ(cid:48)(cid:48)) =

(cid:88)
σ(cid:48),σ

˜f (t+1) , σ(cid:48)(·|σ(cid:48)(cid:48))
(cid:11)
(cid:10)
¯f (t+1)

˜f (t) , σ(·|σ(cid:48))
(cid:10)
¯f (t)

σ(cid:48)(σ(cid:48)(cid:48)) σ(σ(cid:48)) p(t)(σ) .

(cid:11)

Which means that there exists a longer term diﬀerence in selection between σ1 and σ2 iﬀ
the expected exploration distributions σ(cid:48) of their oﬀspring are not equivalent in the sense

σ1(σ(cid:48)) (Ξσ(cid:48)) (cid:54)=

σ2(σ(cid:48)) (Ξσ(cid:48)) .

(cid:88)
σ(cid:48)

(cid:88)
σ(cid:48)

This diﬀerence in selection after two generations may be coined a second order delay eﬀect.
Generally, let us deﬁne two genotypes, (x1, σ1) and (x2, σ2), n-th order equivalent iﬀ their
phenotype and all their expected phenotypic exploration distributions after 0..n−2 mutations
are the same,

(x1, σ1) ≡n (x2, σ2) ⇐⇒ x1 = x2 , n ≥ 2 ⇒ Ξσ1 = Ξσ2 ,

∀1≤k≤n−2 :

(cid:80)σ1,..,σk σ1(σ1) σ1(σ2) .. σk−1(σk) (Ξσk)
(cid:80)σ1,..,σk σ2(σ1) σ1(σ2) .. σk−1(σk) (Ξσk)

=

It follows that, if two genotypes are n-th order equivalent, then there exists no diﬀerence be-
tween the phenotypic dynamics of their evolution for the next n − 1 generations. Thereafter
though, with a delay of n generations, their evolution diﬀers because the expected explo-
ration distributions of the n-th order oﬀspring of these two genotypes are not phenotypically
equivalent.

Acknowledgments

The work was supported by the German Research Foundation DFG under grant SoleSys-II
SCHO 336/5-2.

References

Altenberg, L. (1995). Genome growth and the evolution of the genotype-phenotype map. In
W. Banzhaf & F. H. Eeckman (Eds.), Evolution and Biocomputation: Computational Models
of Evolution, pp. 205–259. Springer, Berlin.

Marc Toussaint

FOGA VII, 169-182, 2003

Angeline, P. (1995). Adaptive and self-adaptive evolutionary computations. In M. Palaniswami,
Y. Attikiouzel, R. Marks, D. B. Fogel, & T. Fukuda (Eds.), Computational Intelligence: A
Dynamic Systems Perspective, pp. 152–163. IEEE Press.

B¨ack, T. (1998). On the behavior of evolutionary algorithms in dynamic environments. In D. Fo-
gel, H.-P. Schwefel, T. B¨ack, & X. Yao (Eds.), Proc. of Fifth IEEE Int. Conf. on Evolutionary
Computation (ICEC 1998), pp. 446–451. IEEE Press.

Baluja, S. & S. Davies (1997). Using optimal dependency-trees for combinatorial optimization:
Learning the structure of the search space. In Proc. of Fourteenth Int. Conf. on Machine
Learning (ICML 1997), pp. 30–38.

Beyer, H.-G. (2001). The Theory of Evolution Strategies. Springer, Berlin.
Eigen, M., J. McCaskill, & P. Schuster (1989). The molecular quasispecies. Advances in chemical

physics 75, 149–263.

Fontana, W. & P. Schuster (1998). Continuity in evolution: On the nature of transitions. Sci-

ence 280, 1431–1433.

Kimura, M. (1983). The Neutral Theory of Molecular Evolution. Cambridge University Press.
M¨uhlenbein, H., T. Mahnig, & A. O. Rodriguez (1999). Schemata, distributions and graphical

models in evolutionary optimization. J. of Heuristics 5, 215–247.

Nordin, P. & W. Banzhaf (1995, 15-19). Complexity compression and evolution. In L. Eshelman
(Ed.), Genetic Algorithms: Proc. of Sixth International Conf. (ICGA 1995), pp. 310–317.
Morgan Kaufmann, Pittsburgh.

Pelikan, M., D. E. Goldberg, & E. Cant´u-Paz (2000). Linkage problem, distribution estimation,

and Bayesian networks. Evolutionary Computation 9, 311–340.

Radcliﬀe, N. J. (1991). Equivalence class analysis of genetic algorithms. Complex Systems 5,

183–205.

Reidys, C. M. & P. F. Stadler (2002). Combinatorial landscapes. SIAM Review 44, 3–54.
Rice, S. H. (1998). The evolution of canalization and the breaking of von Bear’s laws: Modeling

the evolution of development with epistatis. Evolution 52, 647–656.

Schuster, P. (1996). Landscapes and molecular evolution. Physica D 107, 331–363.
Schwefel, H.-P. (1995). Evolution and Optimum Seeking. John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Smith, J. & T. Fogarty (1997). Operator and parameter adaption in genetic algorithms. Soft

Computing 1, 81–87.

Stadler, B. M., P. F. Stadler, G. P. Wagner, & W. Fontana (2001). The topology of the possible:
Formal spaces underlying patterns of evolutionary change. Journal of Theoretical Biology 213,
241–274.

Stephens, C. & J. M. Vargas (2000). Eﬀective ﬁtness as an alternative paradigm for evolutionary
computation I: General formalism. Genetic Programming and Evolvable Machines 1, 363–378.
Stephens, C. & H. Waelbroeck (1999). Codon bias and mutability in HIV sequences. Molecular

Evolution 48, 390–397.

Toussaint, M. (2001). Self-adaptive exploration in evolutionary search. Technical Report IRINI-

2001-05, Institut f¨ur Neuroinformatik, Ruhr-Universit¨at Bochum, Germany.

Toussaint, M. & C. Igel (2002). Neutrality: A necessity for self-adaptation. In Proc. of IEEE

Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC 2002), pp. 1354–1359.
Vose, M. D. (1999). The Simple Genetic Algorithm. MIT Press, Cambridge.
Wagner, G. P. & L. Altenberg (1996). Complex adaptations and the evolution of evolvability.

Evolution 50, 967–976.

Wagner, G. P., G. Booth, & H. Bagheri-Chaichian (1997). A population genetic theory of canal-

ization. Evolution 51, 329–347.

Watson, R. & J. Pollack (2002). A computational model of symbiotic composition in evolutionary

transitions. Biosystems, Special Issue on Evolvability.

