Compact genetic codes
as a search strategy of evolutionary processes

Marc Toussaint

Institute for Adaptive and Neural Computation, University of Edinburgh,
5 Forrest Hill, Edinburgh EH1 2QL, Scotland, UK
mtoussai@inf.ed.ac.uk

Abstract. The choice of genetic representation crucially determines the
capability of evolutionary processes to ﬁnd complex solutions in which
many variables interact. The question is how good genetic representa-
tions can be found and how they can be adapted online to account for
what can be learned about the structure of the problem from previous
samples. We address these questions in a scenario that we term indi-
rect Estimation-of-Distribution: We consider a decorrelated search dis-
tribution (mutational variability) on a variable length genotype space.
A one-to-one encoding onto the phenotype space then needs to induce
an adapted phenotypic variability incorporating the dependencies be-
tween phenotypic variables that have been observed successful previ-
ously. Formalizing this in the framework of Estimation-of-Distribution
Algorithms, an adapted phenotypic variability can be characterized as
minimizing the Kullback-Leibler divergence to a population of previously
selected individuals (parents). Our core result is a relation between the
Kullback-Leibler divergence and the description length of the encoding
in the speciﬁc scenario, stating that compact codes provide a way to
minimize this divergence. A proposed class of Compression Evolutionary
Algorithms and preliminary experiments with an L-system compression
scheme illustrate the approach. We also discuss the implications for the
self-adaptive evolution of genetic representations on the basis of neutral-
ity (σ-evolution) towards compact codes.

1 Introduction

The complexity of a problem largely depends on the interactions between vari-
ables of the solution. A stochastic search process like evolution will perform well
on a complex problem only when the search distribution is adapted to these in-
teractions, i.e., when the search distribution obeys these dependencies between
variables. The ability of natural evolution to ﬁnd highly complex structured or-
ganisms, in which many variables interact in determining the ﬁtness, can only
be understood when acknowledging that evolution did not pursue an exhaustive
search but “learned” to shape the search distribution towards complex, highly
structured organisms (see also [25]).

In evolutionary processes the search distribution is determined by the vari-
ational operators (mutation and recombination) and, in the case of indirect en-
codings, by the choice of genetic representation. The role of the genetic repre-
sentation seems to become particularly important when large and regularly or
hierarchically structured solutions need to be found. The eye-less gene [8] is an
impressive example of a genetic representation speciﬁcally designed to induce
modular structured variability in nature.

The general questions are how to ﬁnd genetic representations that induce
the desired dependencies on the phenotype space, and how they can be adapted
online to account for what can be learned about the structure of the prob-
lem from previous samples. There have been various approaches to characterize
what a good representation is, considering, for example, all possible represen-
tations, Gray vs. binary codes, redundant representations, and recursive encod-
ings [12, 27, 4, 18, 11]. Theoretical approaches concerning the adaptation of the
representation based on the speciﬁc current population include, for example,
Estimation-Of-Distribution Algorithms [17], Walsh analysis [10], and Maximal
Entropy principles [28].

Our approach is to consider a speciﬁc scenario that we term indirect Estima-
tion-of-Distribution: We assume that the search distribution (mutational vari-
ability) on a variable length genotype space is decorrelated. A one-to-one en-
coding onto the phenotype space then needs to induce a proper structured phe-
notypic variability. The idea of this scenario is that the encoding receives all
responsibilities to induce the structural properties of the phenotypic search dis-
tribution, leaving a simple problem of unstructured (decorrelated) adaptation
on the genotype level.

We formalize the scenario within the framework of Estimation-of-Distribution
Algorithms, where an adapted phenotypic variability can be characterized as
minimizing the Kullback-Leibler divergence to a population of previously se-
lected individuals (parents). Our core result is a relation between the Kullback-
Leibler divergence and the description length of the encoding in the speciﬁc
scenario of indirect Estimation-of-Distribution based on a variable length geno-
type space. The result states that compact genetic codes provide a way to min-
imize this divergence—and may thus be seen as transferring similar results on
Minimum Description Length in the context of modeling, in particular model
selection, (e.g., [5, 24]) to the speciﬁc domain of evolutionary search based on
adaptive representations.

An intuitive way to grasp these results might be the following: Consider a
set of good (selected) individuals in the phenotype space. In this parent pop-
ulation there will generally exist dependencies between phenotypic variables of
the individuals, measurable as mutual information between them. This informa-
tion on the dependencies—that stem from selection and have their origin in the
structure of the problem—is what should be extracted and exploited for fur-
ther search. Assume we can map these individuals on variable size strings such
that the average string length is minimized. Before the compression there was
mutual information between the (phenotypic) variables. After the compression,

there should be no mutual information between the symbols that describe the
individuals because otherwise the mapping would not be a minimum description
length compression. Thus, a compression is one way (among others) to map on
genotypic representations in which symbols are decoupled (i.e., to map on a fac-
torial code). The compression can also be considered as an implicit analysis of
the dependencies that have been present in the parent population because it is
able to dissolve them by introducing new symbols. Eventually, the key idea is
that inverting the compression is a mechanism to induce exactly these dependen-
cies. In other words, when there is noise (decorrelated mutational variability) on
the genetic symbols, this noise should translate to phenotypic noise that obeys
these dependencies.

The following two sections will introduce the theoretical framework, including
the indirect induction of a search distribution and the principle of Estimation-
of-Distribution Algorithms. Section 4 derives the main results on the relation
between compact codes and Estimation-of-Distribution. Section 5 aims to illus-
trate the approach by proposing a class of Compression Evolutionary Algorithms
and presenting preliminary experiments with a Compression GA based on a sim-
ple L-system compression scheme (similar to the ideas of Nevill-Manning and
Witten [13]). This leads to the discussion, summarizing the main results, but also
considering practical issues on accumulative versus each-time-step compression,
and implications for understanding the fully self-adaptive evolution of genetic
representations on the basis of neutrality (σ-evolution) towards compact codes.

2 Indirect induction of search distributions

Let P be the search space. A heuristic search scheme is a process in the space
ΛP of distributions over the search space in which a search distribution q ∈ ΛP
is propagated iteratively. In each iteration, samples from q are drawn, evaluated,
and the outcome of evaluation is used to design, according to some heuristic, a
new search distribution in the next step.

For instance, in ordinary Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs) the search distri-
bution is given by a ﬁnite parent population and recombination and mutation
operators. This search distribution is sampled, leading to the ﬁnite oﬀspring pop-
ulation, which is then evaluated, leading to the selection probability distribution
over these oﬀspring. The heuristic to generate the new search distribution in
simple EAs is to sample the selection probability distribution, leading to a new
parent population which in turn induces a new search distribution. We do not
need to specify these operators here explicitly. We develop the theory on the
abstract level of search distributions.

In this paper we are interested in indirect codings of search points. In the
heuristic search framework, this means that a distribution ˜q ∈ ΛG over another
search space G, the genotype space, is maintained. The search distribution q over
the actual search space P (phenotype space) is then given indirectly via a coding

φ : G → P ,

q(x) =

X

g∈[x]φ

˜q(g) , where x ∈ P, g ∈ G, [x]φ = {g ∈ G | φ(g) = x} .

We also use the short notation q = ˜q ◦ φ−1 for this projection of ˜q under φ. The
set [x]φ of all genotypes mapping to the same phenotype x is an equivalence
class under φ, also called neutral set of x.

Two additional constraints deﬁne the “indirect encoding case” considered
in this paper: First, G is the space of variable length strings over some ﬁnite
alphabet A,

G =

∞
[

l=1

Al .

It is technically unclear how to deﬁne a marginal over the ith symbol (or mutual
information between symbols) directly for a variable length distribution ˜q ∈ ΛG.
Thus we will consider the decomposition

˜q(g) = ˜q(g|l) ˜q(l) , where g ∈ G, l = length(g) ∈ N .

Here, ˜q(l) is a distribution over the genotype length l ∈ N, and ˜q(g|l) the con-
ditional distribution over a ﬁxed length alphabet Al. We use the short notation
˜ql ≡ ˜q(·|l) for this length-conditioned distribution. The marginal ˜qi
l over the ith
symbol (i ≤ l) and the mutual information I(˜ql) = P
l ) − H(˜ql) can then
be deﬁned as usual.1

i H(˜qi

As the second constraint we limit the space of possible search distributions
in a certain way: We impose that φ : G → P shall be bijective (one-to-one). We
denote the space of all bijective codings G → P by Φ. And we impose that the
length-conditioned distributions ˜ql on the genotype space have to factorize. We
denote the set of feasible genotype distributions by

˜Q ⊆ {˜q ∈ ΛG | ∀l : I(˜ql) = 0} .

Putting both together, we have the space Q ⊆ ΛP of feasible search distribution
over P as

Q = {˜q ◦ φ−1 | φ ∈ Φ, ˜q ∈ ˜Q} .

(1)

In summary, indirect induction of the search distribution means that, in order
to design a search distribution q ∈ ΛP we have to pick a coding φ ∈ Φ and a
decorrelated distribution ˜q ∈ ˜Q on the genotype space. In other terms, every
feasible search distributions q correspond to a pair (φ, ˜q).

1 For a distribution q over some product space A × · · · A, we generally denote the
marginal over the ith variable by qi. The mutual information I(q) = P
i H(qi) −
H(q) measures all dependencies between variables of any order (not only pair-wise
dependencies).

3 Estimation-Of-Distribution

What is a reasonable heuristic to design a search distribution given the results of
evaluation of previous sample points? We will follow here the idea of Estimation-
Of-Distribution Algorithms [17] which can be described as follows.

We assume that the outcome of evaluation is given as a distribution p over P ,
typically the parent population.2 Given that the space of feasible search distri-
butions is limited to Q, a simple heuristic to chose the new search distribution
is to pick the one that is most similar to p. Similarity can be measured by
the Kullback-Leibler divergence (KLD) D(cid:0)p : q(cid:1) = Ep
between two
distributions, which also captures the structural similarity between two distri-
butions in the sense of the similarity of the diﬀerent order dependencies (see [1,
23], please note the relations between the KLD, log-likelihood, free energy, and
mean energy3). Thus, the heuristic to design the new search distribution q0 reads

log p(x)
q(x)

n

o

q0 = argmin
q∈Q

D(cid:0)p : q(cid:1) .

(2)

We term this speciﬁc kind of an EDA KL-search. The crucial parameter of KL-
search is the choice of the set Q of feasible search distributions. On the one
hand, the choice of Q determines the computational cost of the minimization
(2) in every step. On the other hand, it determines the algorithm’s capability to
exploit the structure observable in p.

Some algorithms of the class of EDAs are exact instantiations of KL-search:
MIMIC [6] chooses Q to be the set of Markov chains, PBIL [2] chooses Q as the
set of factorized distributions. Other EDAs diﬀer from KL-search in the choice
of the similarity measure (they use alternatives to the KLD, e.g., BOA [16] takes
a Bayesian Dirichlet Metric). But all of them can distinctly be characterized by
their choice of Q, which may also be the set of dependency trees [3], Bayesian
networks (BOA, [16]), or Bayesian networks with decision trees at each node
(hBOA, [15]).

Despite its conceptual simplicity, the minimization required in each iteration
of KL-search can be computationally very expensive, depending on the com-
plexity of the distributions in Q. When only simple distributions, like factorized
distributions (PBIL) or Markov chains (MIMIC) are allowed, the minimization

2 Generally, in this formalism p is meant to encode any information that we receive
from evaluations. Typically, p is non-vanishing only on a ﬁnite set of samples (the
oﬀspring population) and the values of p might be (in a normalized way) the ﬁtness
values of these oﬀspring. Alternatively, p might represent a resampling of such a
“ﬁtness distribution over oﬀspring”, which corresponds to the parent population.
3 With the deﬁnitions of the entropy H(p) = Ep {log p(x)} and the log-likelihood
L(q) = Ep {log q(x)} we have D`p : q´ = −H(p)−L(q). One could roughly say, “min-
imizing the KLD means maximizing the log-likelihood and the entropy”. Further,
when deﬁning an energy functional E(x) = − log q(x) and considering its Boltzmann
Z (cid:15)−E(x), then the mean energy E = Ep {E(x)} = −L(q) is the
distribution p(x) = 1
negative log-likelihood while the free energy F = − ln Z = E − H(p) is the KLD.

can be calculated directly. For more complex distributions (like Bayesian net-
works, BOA), the minimization itself requires an iterative procedure.

Finally note that distributions in Q should typically be constrained to have a
minimum entropy. In that way, a repeated cycle of entropy decrease (in the course
of evaluation) and entropy increase (when picking a new search distribution)
ensures exploration and prevents the algorithms from early convergence.

4 Indirect Estimation-Of-Distribution via compression

KL-search proposes how to pick a new search distribution out of Q incorporating
the knowledge on the evaluation of previous samples. In the indirect coding case,
a choice of q means to pick a coding φ and a factorized distribution ˜q on G.
Putting this together, KL-search amounts to a heuristic to pick a coding φ such
that knowledge on previous evaluations is incorporated. In this section we will
derive results on how this heuristic to pick a coding reads more explicitly. We
ﬁrst discuss the simpler ﬁxed-length case before addressing the general one:

Fixed-length case. Let us ﬁrst assume that G contains only strings of ﬁxed
length l, G = Al. Then the marginals ˜qi are straight-forward to deﬁne and
I(˜q) = P
i H(˜qi)−H(˜q) != 0 constrains ˜q to vanishing dependencies (of arbitrary
order) between genes.

Combining (2) with the deﬁnition (1) of Q for the case of indirect codings,

we ﬁnd

D(cid:0)p : q(cid:1) =

X

p(x) ln

x

p(x)

P

g0∈[x]φ

˜q(g0)

X

=

˜p(g) ln

g

˜p(g)
˜q(g)

.

(3)

Here we deﬁned ˜p as the back-projection of p onto the coding space G, ˜p = p ◦ φ.
The last step uses that φ has to be bijective such that there exists exactly
one g ∈ [x]φ. Next we use that ˜q has to factorize, ˜q(g) = ˜q(g1, g2, ..., gl) =
˜q1(g1) ˜q2(g2) · · · ˜ql(gl),

D(cid:0)p : q(cid:1) =

X

˜p(g) ln

g

˜p(g)
˜p1(g1) · · · ˜pl(gl)

X

+

˜p(g) ln

g

˜p1(g1) · · · ˜pl(gl)
˜q1(g1) · · · ˜ql(gl)

= I(˜p) + D(cid:0)˜p(1) : ˜q(cid:1) .

(4)

Here we deﬁned ˜p(1)(g) = ˜p1(g1) ˜p2(g2) · · · ˜pl(gl) as the “factorized reduction” of
˜p (i.e, the product of its marginals, see also [1, 23] on how to generally deﬁne the
kth order reduction ˜p(k) of ˜p containing all and only the dependencies of order
≤ k within ˜p).

This result states that, in order to follow the KL-search scheme in the indirect
coding case, one should ﬁnd a coding φ and a search distribution ˜q such that
I(˜p) + D(cid:0)˜p(1) : ˜q(cid:1) is minimized.

Here, I would like to distinguish two cases. In the ﬁrst case we assume that
˜Q comprises all factorized distributions without a bound on the entropy. In this

case, no matter which φ is chosen, one can always minimize D(cid:0)˜p(1) : ˜q(cid:1) down to
zero by picking ˜q = ˜p(1). Thus, since I(˜p) is independent of ˜q, the minimization
(2) can be realized by ﬁrst optimizing φ and then picking ˜q:

q0 = argmin
q∈Q

D(cid:0)p : q(cid:1) = (φ, ˜q) , where φ = argmin

I(˜p) and ˜q = ˜p(1) .

φ

We call this procedure (ﬁrst optimizing φ, then picking ˜q) the two step procedure.
Note that ˜p(1) in the last equation depends on the φ chosen before.

However, in a realistic algorithm, ˜Q should not comprise all factorized distri-
butions but obey a lower bound on the entropy of these distributions to ensure
exploration. (Recall that for ˜q = ˜p(1), and since φ is bijective, H(p) = H(˜p) =
H(˜p(1)) − I(PG) = H(˜q) − I(˜p) = H(q) − I(˜p). Therefore, the entropy of search
H(q) would only be greater than H(p) by the amount of I(˜p), which is min-
imized.) Hence, in the second case, when ˜Q is only a subset of all factorized
distributions, D(cid:0)˜p(1) : ˜q(cid:1) can generally not be minimized to zero and the mini-
mization of (2) can not exactly be decomposed in the two steps of ﬁrst minimizing
I(˜p) w.r.t. φ, and then, for a ﬁxed φ, minimizing D(cid:0)˜p(1) : ˜q(cid:1) w.r.t. ˜q. The exact
minimization of (2) remains a coupled problem of ﬁnding a pair (φ, ˜q).

For completeness, let us estimate a bound on the “error” made when still
adopting the two step procedure of minimization. Let (φ∗, ˜q∗) be a coding and
genotype distribution that indeed minimize (2), and let (φ0, ˜q0) be the result of
the two step procedure, i.e., φ0 minimizes I(˜p0) and ˜q0 minimizes D(cid:0)˜p0(1) : ˜q0(cid:1)
for the given coding φ0. Here, ˜p0 = p ◦ φ0 and ˜p∗ = p ◦ φ∗. A rough bound for the
error made can be estimated as follows, to be explained in detail below,

D(cid:0)p : q0(cid:1) − D(cid:0)p : q∗(cid:1) = D(cid:0)˜p0(1) : ˜q0(cid:1) − D(cid:0)˜p∗(1) : ˜q∗(cid:1) + I(˜p0) − I(˜p∗)
≤ D(cid:0)˜p0(1) : ˜q0(cid:1) − D(cid:0)˜p∗(1) : ˜q∗(cid:1) ≤ D(cid:0)˜p0(1) : ˜q0(cid:1)

=

l
X

i=1

D(cid:0)˜p0i : ˜q0i(cid:1)

≤ −l log ˜q0i(ai) = − l log(1−α) ≤ l ~ .

The ﬁrst inequality stems from the fact that φ0 minimizes I(˜p0) and thus I(˜p0) ≤
I(˜p∗). Since both, ˜p0(1) and ˜q0, are factorized distributions, their Kullback-Leibler
divergence decomposes into a sum. For each marginal, when there is a lower
bound ~ on the entropy of ˜q0i, the divergence D(cid:0)˜p0i : ˜q0i(cid:1) is particularly large
when ˜p0i has very low entropy. In the worst case, ˜p0i has zero entropy, i.e., is non-
zero only for a single symbol ai ∈ A. In that case D(cid:0)˜p0i : ˜q0i(cid:1) = − log ˜q0i(ai). In
order to minimize D(cid:0)˜p0i : ˜q0i(cid:1), ˜q0i is chosen to have the form of the typical symbol
mutation distribution with mutation rate α, where ˜q0i(a) = 1−α for a = ai and
˜q0i(a) = α
|A|−1 . Given
the lower bound ~ on the entropy, the minimal mutation rate α can be chosen
to ensure H(˜qi) = ~ and D(cid:0)˜pi : ˜qi(cid:1) = − log(1 − α) ≤ ~. Thus, in the worst
case, the “error” made when using the two step procedure instead of the exact
minimization of (2) is smaller than l ~.

|A|−1 for a 6= ai. Then, H(˜qi) = −(1−α) log(1−α) − α log

α

Variable-length case. Let us repeat the above derivations in the general case
when G = S∞
Al comprises strings of any length over the alphabet A. The con-
l=1
straint of vanishing mutual information in ˜q now refers to the length-conditioned
distributions ˜ql, i.e., we impose I(˜ql) = 0 while ˜q(l) is unconstrained. (Recall
˜q(g) = ˜ql(g) ˜q(l) where l = length(g).) Equation (3) now leads to

D(cid:0)p :q(cid:1) =

X

X

˜pl(g)˜p(l) ln

˜pl(g)˜p(l)
˜ql(g)˜q(l)

l

g

X

=

˜p(l)

X

˜pl(g) ln

l

g

X

=

˜p(l)

X

l

g

= El {I(˜pl)} + El

˜pl(g)
˜ql(g)

X

+

˜p(l) ln

l

˜p(l)
˜q(l)

˜pl(g) ln

˜pl(g)
˜p(1)
(g)
l
n
D(cid:0)˜p(1)

l

: ˜ql

X

+

˜p(l)

X

˜pl(g) ln

l

g

(cid:1)o

+ D(cid:0)˜p(l) : ˜q(l)(cid:1) ,

˜p(1)
(g)
l
˜ql(g)

+ D(cid:0)˜p(l) : ˜q(l)(cid:1)

(5)

where we introduced El {·} as the expectation over ˜p(l) (which depends on φ).
The entropy of p can be written as

H(p) = −

= −

X

g
X

l

p(g) ln p(g) = −

X

˜p(l)

l

h X

˜p(l)

g

˜pl(g) ln ˜pl(g) +

X

g
X

g

˜pl(g) ln[˜pl(g) ˜p(l)]

i
˜pl(g) ln ˜p(l)

X

=

l

X

=

˜p(l)H(˜pl(g)) + H(˜p(l))

h l
X

˜p(l)

H(˜pi

i
l) − I(˜pl)

+ H(˜p(l))

l

i=1

= El

)

H(˜pi
l)

( l

X

i=1

− El {I(˜pl)} + H(˜p(l)) .

(6)

Adding equations (5) and (6) we ﬁnd

Lemma 1. In the indirect encoding case, for any p ∈ ΛP , any bijective encoding
φ : G → P , and any factorized genotype distributions ˜q ∈ ˜Q, we have

D(cid:0)p :q(cid:1) = El {I(˜pl)} + El
)
( l

= El

H(˜pi
l)

+ El

X

i=1

n
D(cid:0)˜p(1)

l

(cid:1)o

: ˜ql

+ D(cid:0)˜p(l) : ˜q(l)(cid:1)

(7)

n
D(cid:0)˜p(1)

l

(cid:1)o

: ˜ql

+ D(cid:0)˜p(l) : ˜q(l)(cid:1) + H(˜p(l)) − H(p) .

(8)

The second RHS term in equation (8) is a comparison of only the marginals
of ˜pl and ˜ql, the third term is a comparison of the length distributions, the
fourth term is the entropy of the genotype length, which depends on φ, and

the last term depends only on p, not on φ or ˜q. The ﬁrst term in equation (8)
is of particular interest here. The following bounds show how it relates to the
description length. Note that log |A| is the maximal entropy of a marginal:

El

( l

X

i=1

)

H(˜pi
l)

≤ log |A| El

( l

X

)
1

i=1

= log |A| El {l} = Lp log |A| ,

(9)

where we introduce Lp = El {l} as the expected description length of samples of
p in the encoding φ. On the other hand, from (6), we get

El

( l

X

i=1

)

H(˜pi
l)

≥ H(p) − H(˜p(l)) .

(10)

Note that for an optimally compact coding Lp log |A| = H(p) − H(˜p(l)),4 and
both bounds are exact.

We collect these ﬁndings in

Lemma 2. In the indirect encoding case, the description length Lp of samples
from p (e.g., parents) gives an upper bound on D(cid:0)p : q(cid:1) as follows:

0 ≤ D(cid:0)p : q(cid:1) − El

n
D(cid:0)˜p(1)

l

(cid:1)o

: ˜ql

− D(cid:0)˜p(l) : ˜q(l)(cid:1) ≤ Lp log |A| − H(p) + H(˜p(l)) .

For an optimally compact encoding φ, these bounds are exact, i.e., we have

D(cid:0)p : q(cid:1) = El

n
D(cid:0)˜p(1)

l

(cid:1)o

: ˜ql

+ D(cid:0)˜p(l) : ˜q(l)(cid:1) ,

and D(cid:0)p : q(cid:1) can easily be minimized by adapting the genotype marginals ˜qi
the length distribution ˜q(l) (which can be set equal to ˜p(l)).

l and

Let us brieﬂy summarize and discuss these results by emphasizing certain

aspects:

(cid:8)P

1. Compression is doing “more than we need”: Reconsider the exact expressions
l)(cid:9) to the description Lp
(7) and (8) of lemma 1. We related the term El
via the bound (9) and showed that this bound is exact for an optimal compres-
sion. One should note though that compression is not the only way to minimize
(cid:8)P
l)(cid:9); it can equally be minimized by reducing the marginal
the term El
entropies H(˜pi
l), which means not to exploit the expressional power of the al-
phabet. This can better be understood going back to expression (7) involving
the mutual information: Ultimately, what matters is to reduce El {I(˜pl)}, i.e.
ﬁnding a factorial code, which can also be done perfectly with very low marginal

i H(˜pi

i H(˜pi

4 Here is a slight diﬀerence to the usually considered case of channel capacity: In our
case, the length of a genome itself can carry information (even for A = {0}) of the
amount H(˜p(l)) such that the symbols only need to encode H(p) − H(˜p(l)) entropy.
In the channel capacity case, where a continuous stream of symbols is transmitted,
the exact bound is Lp log |A| = H(p), as for the Shannon-Fano code.

entropies, not exploiting the alphabet. By relating it to the description length
we showed that a compression is reducing El {I(˜pl)} while additionally trying to
exploit the alphabet optimally. Thus, compression is doing “more than we need”
from the strict point of view of minimizing D(cid:0)p : q(cid:1). Clearly, this also means
that an optimally compact coding is not the only solution to minimize D(cid:0)p : q(cid:1)
via indirect induction—but it is one.

2. If there are no further constraints on ˜q (e.g., no entropy bound) then ˜ql and
(cid:1)o
˜q(l) can be set equal to ˜p(1)
+
D(cid:0)˜p(l) : ˜q(l)(cid:1). In this case, we have

and ˜p(l), thus perfectly minimizing El

n
D(cid:0)˜p(1)

: ˜ql

l

l

D(cid:0)p : q(cid:1) = El {I(˜pl)} = El

)

H(˜pi
l)

( l

X

i=1

+ H(˜p(l)) − H(p) ,

and the problem reduces to ﬁnding an encoding that extinguishes the mutual
information El {I(˜pl)} or, as discussed, an optimal compression.

3. The two step procedure: If ˜Q is additionally constrained by a bound on the
entropy, minimizing D(cid:0)p : q(cid:1) remains a coupled problem of reducing El {I(˜pl)}
n
D(cid:0)˜p(1)
+D(cid:0)˜p(l) : ˜q(l)(cid:1) by a proper
by a proper choice of φ and reducing El
choice of ˜q, which though depends on φ. We discussed this coupled problem
already in the ﬁxed-length case. The two step procedure of ﬁrst ﬁnding a compact
coding φ of p and then adapting the marginals of ˜q to those of p ◦ φ is an
approximate method for this minimization. In the worst case one may miss a
reduction of D(cid:0)p : q(cid:1) by an amount ≤ Lp ~, when ~ is the lower bound on the
entropy in each marginal ˜qi
l . Note that a compact coding minimizes this worst
case error.

(cid:1)o

: ˜ql

l

5 Compression EAs

This section aims to provide a perspective on how the ideas on compact codes
motivate the design of new Evolutionary Algorithms. We will propose a general
scheme to design such algorithms but can present preliminary results only for a
special case that is more in the line of conventional GAs rather than EDAs and
close to algorithms proposed earlier. The results are promising. Most importantly
though, the experiments exhibit what are crucial aspects to be discussed when
the aim are practical implementations of the principle of compact codes.

A straight-forward way to design a new Evolutionary Algorithm, exploiting
the idea of compact codes, is to combine any compression technique with any
standard EA. Such a Compression EA reads

1. Initialize a ﬁnite population p = {p1, .., pµ}.
2. Use a compression technique to ﬁnd an encoding φ that (approximately) mini-

mizes Lp = Pµ

i=1 length(φ−1(pi)).

3. Apply standard operators (e.g., mixing or EDA-operators) to generate λ oﬀ-

spring genotypes from the µ compressed parent genotypes.
4. Map the λ oﬀspring genotypes from G back to P using φ.
5. Apply evaluation and selection on these oﬀspring to generate the new parent

population p0 and repeat from step 2.

The operators in step 3 may be any standard operators used in Evolutionary
Algorithms. They have to be memory-less though, since the encoding will change
in each iteration step and thus integrating knowledge from previous time steps
becomes futile (cf. the discussion of cumulative compression as an alternative in
section 6).

For instance, a most direct implementation of KL-search calculates the length
and marginal distributions before resampling them (very similar to the PBIL
algorithm, but accounting for variable size strings). This leads to the following
Compression EDA:

3.a Calculate the length distributions ˜p(l) and the symbol marginals ˜pi

l for each l

from the compressed population ˜p.

3.b Set ˜q(l) = ˜p(l) and add entropy by mixing the marginals with the uniform

symbol distribution U, ˜qi

l = (1 − α) ˜pi

l + α U.

3.c Take λ samples from the distribution ˜q by recursively (i) picking an l from ˜q(l),
l , and (iii) store g = (g1, .., gl) as a new

i=1 pick a symbol gi from ˜qi

(ii) ∀l
oﬀspring genotype.

We must leave it to future work to present results on this Compression EDA.
In the following we will investigate a concrete algorithm that is based on conven-
tional mutation operators rather than such an EDA and similar to algorithms
proposed earlier [7, 20]. The compression technique is based on L-systems, very
simple, but computationally expensive. It is inspired by the work of Nevill-
Manning and Witten [13]. Below we will brieﬂy report on some experiences
when using Lempel-Ziv compression (i.e., the algorithm of gzip) instead.

5.1 A L-system Compression GA

The Compression. Step 2 of a Compression EA requires to ﬁnd an encoding φ
that minimizes the description length of individuals averaged over the current
parent population. A simple technique of compression is to recursively analyze
the samples for frequent pairs of neighboring symbols and replace such pairs by
new symbols (cf. [13]). We realize this scheme with an L-system:

A L-system is a sequence Π = hπ1, .., πki of k productions πi. Given the
alphabet A, each production π = hl : r1, .., rmi consists of a LHS symbol l ∈ A
and a sequence hr1, .., rmi of RHS symbols. The L-system Π deﬁnes a mapping
φ from one sequence s to another by applying all productions πi, in the given
order, on s. Applying a production hl : r1, .., rmi on s means to replace every l
that occurs in s by the sequence hr1, .., rmi. For instance, if the L-system is Π =
he:cd, f:dc, c:ab, d:bai, then a sequence hefi is mapped to φ(hefi) = habbabaabi.
The mapping φ can easily be inverted by applying all productions, in reverse

order, inversely on a sequence. Inverse application of a production hl : r1, .., rmi−1
on s means to replace every subsequence hr1, .., rmi that occurs in s by l.

Let A be the non-negative integer numbers, A = N0. Starting with a pop-
ulation p = {s1, .., sµ} of {0, 1}-sequences, there is a straight-forward way to
construct an L-system that compresses the population by recursively extracting
and encapsulating pairs of symbols that occur frequently in the population. This
scheme reads

2.a Initialize the L-system as Π = h i and the new -symbol as c = 2.
2.b Calculate the frequency of every symbol pair that occurs in the population.
2.c For every pair hr1, r2i of symbols that occurs more often than once, create a
new production hc : r1, r2i, append it to the beginning of Π, and increment the
new -symbol c ← c + 1. This is to be done in order, beginning with the pair of
highest frequencies, and random order between pairs of same frequency. If there
is no such pairs, exit the recursion.

2.d Recode the population p ← {φ−1(p1), .., φ−1(pµ)} (eﬀectively, only the new

productions will result in replacements).

2.f Repeat from step 2.b.

The entropy. Following the general scheme of a Compression EA, we next need
to specify a mixing operator in step 3. This operator is supposed to induce the
necessary entropy in ˜q. We discussed earlier that this entropy should exceed the
entropy H(p) of the parent population to ensure further exploration, and we han-
dled this issue theoretically by putting a lower bound on the entropy of feasible
search distributions in the minimization of the Kullback-Leibler divergence.

However, ﬁrst experiments showed quickly that there is an interesting prob-
lem when using the above compression in a straight-forward manner. Actually,
the compression can be considered as too good and eventually violating the
constraint of the lower bound on entropy: In the case of a ﬁnite population, the
compression scheme often leads to what we term a full compression, where in the
end every individual is represented by a diﬀerent single symbol. The compressed
population thus is only a set of µ diﬀerent single symbols, and the description
length was minimized down to 1. The mutual information indeed vanishes for the
full compression. However, on this representation it is impossible to induce more
entropy than the parent population had (which is, if they are disjoint, log µ).
The parent population already has maximal entropy under all distributions over
only one symbol (since ˜q(l) = ˜p(l) is ﬁxed) of the alphabet {1, .., µ}. Thus, the
full compression violates the constraint of the lower bound on entropy of ˜q and
is thus infeasible.

A solution to this problem with the above compression scheme would be to
stop compression at some level, maybe at the price that the mutual information
is not fully extinguished, but allowing for the addition of entropy. We follow this
approach by choosing the level of compression stochastically or, equivalently, to
add entropy on diﬀerent levels of compression.

Concretely, the algorithm stochastically decides whether to apply one-point
mutations on each level of compression, i.e., in each recursion of the compression
scheme. We insert the following step in the compression recursion:

2.e For each individual, decide with a probability α whether to apply a one-point
mutation. A one-point mutation randomly picks a location and, with equal
probabilities, deletes it, replaces it with a new symbol in {0, .., c − 1}, or inserts
such a new symbol.

This competes the description of the algorithm which omits an additional step
3.

The Hierarchical XOR problem. The ﬁtness function we consider is the Hier-
archical XOR (HXOR) function [26, 7]. For a string s ∈ {0, 1}n we ﬁrst de-
ﬁne a boolean function h(s) ∈ {0, 1}, determining whether s is “valid” or not:
Let n = length(s) be the string length, l ∈ N0 such that n/2 ≤ 2l < n
(l = blog2(n − 1)c), and L = s1:2l and R = s2l+1:n the left and right parts of
the string when cut at location 2l. Then, for n ≥ 2, we deﬁne

h(s) = 1 ⇐⇒

h

n = 2l+1 ∧ h(L) = 1 ∧ h(R) = 1 ∧ L = ¯R

i

,

and h(s) = 1 if n = 1. Here ¯R is the bit-wise negation of the right part. The last
condition means that the bit-wise xor between left and right part must be true
for each bit. For instance, the strings for which h(s) = 1 are, up to length 16,
h0i, h01i, h0110i, h0110 1001i, h0110 1001 1001 0110i, and their bit-wise negations.
Based on h, we deﬁne a ﬁtness function H(s) ∈ N, for n ≥ 2,

H(s) = H(L) + H(R) +

(cid:26) n if h(s) = 1

0 else

,

and H(s) = 1 if n = 1. To normalize and put a limit on the string length, we
deﬁne the lth HXOR function Hl(s) ∈ [0, 1]: If s is longer than 2l, let s0 = s1:2l
and otherwise s0 = s. Then,

Hl(s) =

1
2l(l + 1)

H(s0) .

The normalization is given by the highest possible value 2l(1 + l) of H(s) for a
length 2l string. There exist two global optima of Hl, namely the two “valid”
strings of length l for which h(s) = 1.

Parameters. For the experiments, we use simple (µ,λ)-selection with population
sizes µ = 30 and λ = 100 and one elitist. The mutation probability (as indicated
in step 2.e of the algorithm) is α = 0.1. The population was initialized with all
h01i individuals.

Results. We tested the algorithm on the HXOR problem. Figure 1A displays
the ﬁtness trajectories for 20 runs on the 1024-bit HXOR problem. All runs
consistently found the optimal 1024-bit string. It took on average 519 generations
to reach this global optimum (with standard deviation ±168 generations).

Figure 1B displays the average ﬁrst hitting generation and standard deviation
for diﬀerent length HXOR problems, up to a problem size of 8192 bits. (Beyond

Table 1. A L-system found to compress a population of identical solutions to the
1024-bit HXOR. The full L-system is composed of 27 productions and reads hC:10,
D:1C, E:0D, F:CD, G:0F, H:EG, I:CH, J:CG, K:EI, L:EJ, M:LI, N:JK, O:NM, P:JM, Q:KO,
R:PO, S:KR, T:QS, U:QP, V:UT, W:SV, X:US, Y:PT, Z:PW, a:XY, b:VZ, c:bai. In the
table, we expanded the RHS of these productions and, for brevity, only displayed the
ﬁrst 15 productions.

C:10
D:110
E:0110
F:1 0110
G:01 0110
H:01 1001 0110
I:1001 1001 0110
J:1001 0110

K:0110 1001 1001 0110
L:0110 1001 0110
M:0110 1001 0110 1001 1001 0110
N:1001 0110 0110 1001 1001 0110
O:1001 0110 0110 1001 1001 0110 0110 1001 0110 1001 1001 0110
P:1001 0110 0110 1001 0110 1001 1001 0110
etc...

that, exhaustive memory swapping slowed the algorithm too much down.) The
algorithm found the optimum in all runs for all problem sizes and the variance of
the ﬁrst hitting generation is relatively small for a stochastic search scheme. The
diagram also shows that the number of generations needed to ﬁnd an optimum
seems to grow linearly with the problem size.

To give an impression on the codings developed by the L-system compression
scheme, table 1 displays an L-system found to compress a population of identical
solutions to the 1024-bit HXOR problem. As discussed above, this compression
implements a full compression such that eventually every individual is repre-
sented by a single symbol c. We ﬁnd that some productions represent the typical
modules of HXOR solutions (like E:0110 or J:1001 0110) while others represent
parts of these modules. Recall that the order in with productions are added to
the L-system is stochastic (cf. step 2.c). Consequently, the coding is not strictly
hierarchical as a human might have designed it (or DevRep, see below) and the
L-system comprises more pair-productions than minimally necessary to encode
the sequence of length 1024 (which is 19).

Generally, the performance of the algorithm—in terms of the generations
needed—is of the same order as the DevRep algorithm presented by de Jong
[7], which is the only previous algorithm we are aware of capable of solving large
HXOR problems. ([7] reported only on results for the 64-bit and 1024-bit HXOR
problem, where about 2.3·107 bit evaluations were needed in the single 1024-bit
run presented.) The DevRep algorithm is tailored to hierarchical problems,
where diﬀerent hierarchy levels are explicitly distinguished and mutational vari-
ations allowed only within a speciﬁc hierarchy level. It should be clear that plain
variable length GAs perform extremely bad on the HXOR problem because of
its complex deceptiveness when search is performed on an atomic representation
(see [7] for experiments).

Notes on gzip. The compression scheme used is computationally very expensive.
We argue below that a proper solution might be a cumulative approach to ﬁnd
compressions which are not recalculated in each generation. Alternatively, one

A

B

Fig. 1. A. The trajectory of the best individual ﬁtness for 20 runs on the 1024-bit
HXOR problem. One of the runs is drawn bold. B. First hitting generations, averaged
over 20 runs for each of the diﬀerent HXOR problem sizes.

Table 2. The ﬁrst line is the original string, composed of 15×abcd. The lines below
show 20 variations, generated by compressing the string with LZ-compression, applying
a single one-point mutation, and decompressing again. Dots indicate that the symbol
has not varied compared to the original string

abcdabcdabcdabcdabcdabcdabcdabcdabcdabcdabcdabcdabcdabcdabcd
.a...a...a...a...a...a...a...a...a...a...a...a...a...a...a..
..........................................d.ddabcdabcd
..............................................abdabcdabcd
........ddabcdabcddbcdd.dddbcddbcddbcddbcddbcdabcdabcd
.....................cabcdabcdac.caccdaccdaccdabcdabcd
......aabadabcdabaabcdab.dab.dabcdabcdab.aba..a...a...a.
........bcdabcdabcdbbcdbcdbcd.bcd.bcd.bcd.bcd.bcdabcdabcd
d...d...d...d...d...d...d...d...d...d...d...d...d...d...d...
......ab..a.......ab......a...a...........ab..ab..a...a...a.
............................................................
.................................cdacdaccdabcdabcdabcdabcd
......bc..b.......bc......b...b...........bc..bc..b...b...b.
........................cc.bcd.bcd.bcdabcdabcdabcdabcd
.............abcddaacdaabcd..........abcddaabcd..a...a...a..aacdaacd
...a...a...a...a...a...a...a...a...a...a...a...a...a...a...a
....dcd.cddbcddbcddbcddcdd..d...d...d...d...d...d...d...
...................................................bcdabcdab
.....................dabcabcdabcdadabca....adcdadcdadcdabcdabcd
............................................................
..................bcd.....................bcd.bcd.b...b...b.

might want to use eﬃcient standard compression techniques, for example the
Lempel-Ziv compression as used by gzip. We performed some experiments also
with this compression algorithm.

However, LZ-compression has some instructive practical drawbacks. Let us
ﬁrst consider to compress a single sequence, mutate it, and decompress it. The
symbol mutations of the compressed string have to obey some constraints such
that the compressed sequence remains a valid string that can be decompressed
by the LZ algorithm (the possible symbol range at each location is diﬀerent).
Table 2 displays the result of 20 diﬀerent one-point mutations on the compressed
representation. Here, a second issue about LZ-compression becomes apparent.
The mutations at the beginning of the string are less likely to be severe or
modular than at the end of the string. The reason is that LZ-compression is a 1-
pass scheme which builds up codes while parsing the string. In the beginning, no
codes have been build up yet and the string remains largely uncompressed. This
a priori asymmetry is very undesirable in the context of evolutionary exploration.
A possible trick is to concatenate the same string several times, compress the
concatenation, mutate only the part which represents the last copy of the string,
and decompress.

When implementing an algorithm, we exploited this observation. To compress
and mutate a single individual, we concatenated all individuals of the population
and additionally appended the individual of interest into a long sequence and
compressed it. In this manner, LZ-compression ﬁrst uses the whole population
sequence to build up codes that are then used to compress the last individ-
ual. Then we mutated the compressed representation of the last individual and
decompressed it. A computationally very expensive scheme, again.

Experiments with the HXOR problem showed a very high variance in per-
formance between runs. For the 128-bit HXOR problem it frequently occurred
that runs never ﬁnd the optimum while others ﬁnd it within a few hundred
generations. Generally, the experiments with LZ-compression gave some impor-
tant insight in the relevance of how the codes are build up. They do however
not support the practical use of conventional LZ-compression for evolutionary
algorithms.

6 Discussion

Summary. The basis on which we developed the theoretical analysis was the
indirect Estimation-of-Distribution scenario, where a distribution over P is esti-
mated via a distribution over a genotype space G and an encoding φ : G → P .
The genotype distribution is restricted to factorize. Thus the problem of es-
timating a distribution is split into “decoding” the structural aspects of the
distribution (via compression) and then estimating the remaining structure-less
factorized distribution. The main result are Lemmas 1 and 2 relating the KLD
subject to minimization to the description length of the encoding.

The class of Compression EAs proposed in the last section are straight-
forward combinations of compression techniques with standard EA operators.
An algorithm based on a simple type of L-system compression performs reli-
ably well on the hierarchically deceptive HXOR function, which we tested up to
a problem size of 8192 bits. The number of generations needed seems to grow
linearly with the problem size.

However, the main aim of giving this explicit example for a Compression
EA was to introduce to the following discussion of two aspects that seem to be
important (i) when thinking about future, computationally eﬃcient Compression
EAs and (ii) when considering the implications of the presented theory for the
understanding of natural evolution and the self-adaptive evolution of genetic
representations.

Cumulative compression. The L-system compression we used has properties that
proved beneﬁcial in the experiments: unlike LZ-compression it is unbiased w.r.t.
which modules are encapsulated and it can develop arbitrary hierarchies. To re-
compute the compression from scratch at every generation also has advantages:
the encoding is always adapted to the current population, i.e. the currently avail-
able information about the problem, and the stochasticity of the compression
scheme leads to more diversity in exploration at diﬀerent generations.

Clearly though, recomputing the compression at every generation is compu-
tationally very expensive. The general scheme of a Compression EA should thus
be modiﬁed to develop the compact encoding in a cumulative manner rather
than recomputing it at every generation. In the case of L-system compression,
cumulative could mean that the L-system is persistent over the generations and
at each generation only a single new production is added or an old, unused pro-
duction deleted. Assuming that the inherent structure of found solutions will

not evolve too fast, the cumulative scheme would still allow to provide a good
compression of the current population.

Besides being computationally much more eﬀective, the cumulative approach
has another interesting perspective. Since the encoding is incrementally build up
during evolution, the encoding becomes a variable that integrates information
about the successful solutions over more than one generation. This is comparable
to strategy parameters in Evolution Strategies which, for instance, integrate the
average movement of the population over the recent history, assuming that this
search direction will also be proﬁtable in the future [9]. Such schemes have hardly
been transferred to ordinary GAs because the notion of “proceeding in the same
direction” makes no sense on the hypercube. The notion does make sense though
on the more abstract level of “proceeding by incorporating the same structural
dependencies that have previously been successful”—where the notion of “search
direction” is replaced by the notion of “structural properties of search”. The
encoding becomes the variable which is capable to integrate such information.
The objective of compactness indicates how an adequate permanent adaptation
can be achieved.

Self-adaptive σ-evolution of compact representations. In this work we addressed
a bijective encoding φ that is adapted explicitly (externally) at each generation.
This approach is complementary to the formalism we proposed earlier to describe
the self-adaptive evolution of genetic representations [22, 21]. The proper way to
formalize the self-adaptive case is to consider a ﬁxed but non-injective genotype-
phenotype mapping. In that case there exists a variety (neutral set) of diﬀerent
genotypes that map to the same phenotype. The “choice of genetic represen-
tation” here means which genotype from the neutral set is chosen to encode
the phenotype. The speciﬁc example investigated in [20] clariﬁes the relation
between the two complementary frameworks: A genotype in the self-adaptive
scenario may be the tuple (g0, Π) of a (compact) string g0 (termed axiom, or
egg cell) and an L-system Π (termed genome). The global genotype-phenotype
mapping from the space of such tuples to phenotype is clearly ﬁxed. But diﬀer-
ent genotypes, involving diﬀerent L-systems Π, may map to the same phenotype
and thus induce structurally completely diﬀerent phenotypic variabilities. In this
scenario, the evolution of genetic representations can be understood as moves in
the neutral set, e.g., neutral reorganizations of the L-system Π.

In [22] it was show that the self-adaptive evolution of genetic representations
is driven by an implicit selection which discriminates phenotypically equivalent
genotypes by the quality of the phenotypic variability that they induce (which is
related to the eﬀective ﬁtness [14, 19]). More precisely, the selectional advantage
of diﬀerent genetic representations of the same phenotype is proportional to the
negative Kullback-Leibler divergence between the phenotypic variability and the
Boltzmann ﬁtness distribution (assuming a lower bound on phenotypic entropy,
see [22] for details).

The objective of minimizing the Kullback-Leibler divergence is thus the key
to transfer the results we derived here to the self-adaptive scenario, now stat-
ing that there is an eﬀective selection pressure on the description length of a

genetic representation. Indeed, a tendency towards compact representations was
observed in experiments on σ-evolution [20]. It was previously argued that its
origin is the advantage of mutational robustness when every genetic symbol un-
derlies a constant mutation rate. We can now add another origin, namely that
compact representations are structurally more favorable—meaning that the phe-
notypic variability they induce allows to reduce the Kullback-Leibler divergence
and follow the Estimation-of-Distribution principle. However, it is yet open to
which degree both eﬀects contributed to the evolution of compact codes.

Acknowledgment

I would like to thank the German Research Foundation (DFG) for their funding
of the Emmy Noether fellowship TO 409/1-1, allowing me to pursue this research.

References

1. S. Amari. Information geometry on hierarchy of probability distributions. IEEE

Transactions on Information Theory, 47(5):1701–1711, 2001.

2. S. Baluja. Population-based incremental learning: A method for integrating genetic
search based function optimization and competitive learning. Technical Report
CMU-CS-94-163, Comp. Sci. Dep., Carnegie Mellon U., 1994.

3. S. Baluja and S. Davies. Using optimal dependency-trees for combinatorial opti-
mization: Learning the structure of the search space. In Proc. of Fourteenth Int.
Conf. on Machine Learning (ICML 1997), pages 30–38, 1997.

4. L. Barbulescu, J.-P. Watson, and D. Whitley. Dynamic representations and escap-
ing local optima: Improving genetic algorithms and local search. In Seventeenth
National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI), pages 879–884, 2000.

5. A. Barron, J. Rissanen, and B. Yu. The minimum description length principle in
coding and modeling. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 44:2743–2760,
1998.

6. J. S. de Bonet, C. L. Isbell, Jr., and P. Viola. MIMIC: Finding optima by estimating
probability densities.
In M. C. Mozer, M. I. Jordan, and T. Petsche, editors,
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 9, page 424. The MIT
Press, 1997.

7. E. D. de Jong. Representation development from Pareto-Coevolution.

In 2003

Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference (GECCO 2003), 2003.

8. G. Halder, P. Callaerts, and W. Gehring. Induction of ectopic eyes by targeted

expression of the eyeless gene in Drosophila. Science, 267:1788–1792, 1995.

9. N. Hansen and A. Ostermeier. Completely derandomized self-adaption in evolu-

tionary strategies. Evolutionary Computation, 9:159–195, 2001.

10. R. B. Heckendorn and A. H. Wright. Eﬃcient linkage discovery by limited probing.

Evolutionary Computation, 2004. Accepted for publication.

11. G. S. Hornby and J. B. Pollack. The advantages of generative grammatical encod-
ings for physical design. In Proc. of 2001 Congress on Evolutionary Computation
(CEC 2001), pages 600–607. IEEE Press, 2001.

12. G. E. Liepins and M. D. Vose. Representation issues in Genetic Algorithms. Journal

of Experimental and Theoretical Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2, 1990.

13. C. G. Nevill-Manning and I. H. Witten. Identifying hierarchical structure in se-
quences: A linear-time algorithm. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 7:67–
82, 1997.

14. P. Nordin and W. Banzhaf. Complexity compression and evolution. In L. Eshel-
man, editor, Genetic Algorithms: Proc. of Sixth International Conf. (ICGA 1995),
pages 310–317. Morgan Kaufmann, Pittsburgh, 15-19 1995.

15. M. Pelikan and D. E. Goldberg. Hierarchical BOA solves Ising spin glasses and
MAXSAT. In Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference 2003 (GECCO-
2003), pages pp. 1271–1282. Springer-Verlag, 2003.

16. M. Pelikan, D. E. Goldberg, and E. Cant´u-Paz. Linkage problem, distribution
estimation, and Bayesian networks. Evolutionary Computation, 9:311–340, 2000.
17. M. Pelikan, D. E. Goldberg, and F. Lobo. A survey of optimization by building
and using probabilistic models. Technical Report IlliGAL-99018, Illinois Genetic
Algorithms Laboratory, 1999.

18. F. Rothlauf and D. E. Goldberg. Redundant representations in Evolutionary Com-

putation. Evolutionary Computation, 11:381–415, 2003.

19. C. R. Stephens and J. M. Vargas. Eﬀective ﬁtness as an alternative paradigm
for evolutionary computation I: General formalism. Genetic Programming and
Evolvable Machines, 1:363–378, 2000.

20. M. Toussaint. Demonstrating the evolution of complex genetic representations:
An evolution of artiﬁcial plants. In 2003 Genetic and Evolutionary Computation
Conference (GECCO 2003), pages 86–97, 2003.

21. M. Toussaint. The evolution of genetic representations and modular neural adap-
tation, April 2003. PhD thesis, Institut f¨ur Neuroinformatik, Ruhr-Universi¨at-
Bochum, Germany. Published with the Logos Verlag Berlin (2004), ISBN 3-8325-
0579-2, 173 pages.

22. M. Toussaint. On the evolution of phenotypic exploration distributions.

In
C. Cotta, K. De Jong, R. Poli, and J. Rowe, editors, Foundations of Genetic Al-
gorithms 7 (FOGA VII), pages 169–182. Morgan Kaufmann, 2003.

23. M. Toussaint. Notes on information geometry and evolutionary processes, 2004.

Los Alamos pre-print nlin.AO/0408040.

24. P. M. B. Vit´anyi and M. Li. Minimum Description Length induction, Bayesianism,
and Kolmogorov complexity. IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, IT-46:446–464, 2000.
25. G. P. Wagner and L. Altenberg. Complex adaptations and the evolution of evolv-

ability. Evolution, 50:967–976, 1996.

26. R. A. Watson and J. B. Pollack. Hierarchically consistent test problems for genetic
algorithms: Summary and additional results. In Late breaking papers at the Genetic
and Evolutionary Computation Conference, pages 292–297, 1999.

27. D. Whitley, S. Rana, and R. Heckendorn. Representation issues in neighborhood
search and evolutionary algorithms. In Genetic Algorithms and Evolution Strategy
in Engineering and Computer Science, pages 39–58. John Wiley Sons Ltd., 1997.
28. A. H. Wright, R. Poli, C. R. Stephens, W. B. Langdon, and S. Pulavarty. An
Estimation of Distribution Algorithm based on maximum entropy. In 2004 Ge-
netic and Evolutionary Computation Conference (GECCO 2004), pages 343–354.
Springer, Berlin, 2004.

