Towards an Empirical Measure of Evolvability

Joseph Reisinger
joeraii@cs.utexas.edu

Kenneth O. Stanley
kstanley@cs.utexas.edu

Risto Miikkulainen
risto@cs.utexas.edu

Dept. of Computer Sciences
University of Texas at Austin
1 University Station, C0500
Austin TX, 78712-0233

ABSTRACT
Genetic representations that do not employ a one-to-one
mapping of genotype to phenotype are known as indirect
encodings, and can be much more eﬃcient than direct en-
codings for complex problems. Increasing a representation’s
capacity to facilitate eﬀective search, i.e. its evolvability, has
long been a goal of Evolutionary Computation. However,
currently no benchmarks exist to measure evolvability. One
reason is that it is diﬃcult to decouple a representation’s
capacity to evolve under any ﬁtness function, i.e. the la-
tent evolvability, and its performance on a speciﬁc bench-
mark. Towards this goal, a method is proposed in this paper
that measures the representation’s ability to extract invari-
ant properties from a changing ﬁtness function. The test
is applied to three distinct representations and it is able to
distinguish all three. Ultimately, this test can serve as the
foundation for performing controlled experiments determin-
ing what factors contribute to evolvability.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
G.1.6 [Optimization]: Global Optimization; I.2.8 [Artiﬁcial
Intelligence]: Problem Solving, Control Methods, and Search

General Terms
experimentation, measurement, performance
Keywords
genetic algorithms, evolvability, representations, indirect en-
codings, genetic regulatory networks, development

1.

INTRODUCTION

Evolvability is the genome’s ability to adaptively organize
how mutations aﬀect the phenotype, through a many-to-one
genotype-phenotype mapping [6, 17, 21]. This kind of adap-
tation arises through the interactions between the genetic
operators and the genetic representation (i.e. the genotype-
phenotypic map). Although it is generally believed that
improving the evolvability of artiﬁcial evolutionary systems

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
GECCO’05, June 25–29, 2005, Washington, DC, USA.
Copyright 2005 ACM 1-59593-097-3/05/0006 ...$5.00.

would beneﬁt evolutionary computation (EC), to date no
standardized test exists to measure it.

Two primary reasons motivate an empirical measure of
evolvability. First, such a test can determine whether or
not representations exist that are evolvable across many ﬁt-
ness functions. Second, such a test would make it easier to
study what factors contribute to evolvability, which in turn
will allow EC researchers to methodically construct repre-
sentations more amenable to artiﬁcial evolution. Ultimately
this may lead to a more fundamental understanding of why
indirect encodings seem to be more evolvable in general.

Determining exactly what factors aﬀect evolvability is im-
portant because artiﬁcial developmental systems that are
based on biology (e.g. models with multiple cells, genetic
regulatory networks, etc.) are computationally expensive,
and it is therefore important to ﬁnd the most tractable rep-
resentation with high evolvability. Such models may provide
valuable insight into more complex systems [6]. This paper
takes a ﬁrst step in this direction, focusing on relatively sim-
ple genotype-phenotype mappings.

Unfortunately, directly measuring evolvability is diﬃcult

for several reasons:

1. Evolvability in natural evolution is the capacity for an
adaptive response to a dynamic environment (ﬁtness
function)[8], however in artiﬁcial evolution, the ﬁtness
function is in many cases static, so there is little selec-
tion pressure for “evolvability” in the biological sense.

2. It is possible to overlook the eﬀects of convergence in
a trained population. A population with training on
a certain domain may have acquired some evolvabil-
ity with respect to that domain, but may be more
converged than a randomly initialized population, and
thus may perform less eﬃciently. This is also inﬂu-
enced by the location of the population in the genetic
space, with respect to the target function.

3. Finally, it is easy to confuse search performance and
evolvability. For example, a particular encoding may
solve a simple problem more eﬃciently, but not exhibit
any traits associated with evolvability. Moreover, the
traits that facilitate eﬀective long-term evolution may
not directly beneﬁt evolution in the short-term.

This paper describes a principled method to address these
diﬃculties and establish a direct test for a representation’s
contribution to evolvability (disregarding genetic operators
as a source of evolvability). The evolvability of a particular
representation acquired during the course of evolution can

be measured as the degree to which the representation en-
ables evolution to identify and exploit underlying factors in-
herent in the ﬁtness function, for example fundamental sym-
metries or modular structures. This measure can be used to
augment more theoretical analysis, for example through an-
alyzing representations that induce neutral networks [4].

This paper is organized into four main sections: a descrip-
tion of natural and artiﬁcial evolvability, the evolvability
measure, the representations tested, and the results.

2. EVOLVABILITY

Evolvability has been deﬁned several ways, e.g. the “abil-
ity to respond to a selective challenge” [8], the “ability of
random variations to sometimes produce improvement” [21],
etc. Evolvability can be intuitively understood as adaptive
organization of the genotype-phenotype mapping such that
the search operators produce more favorable phenotypes (i.e.
choose a mapping with local neighborhoods around good so-
lutions that are amenable to search). In this sense, evolv-
ability is an aspect of the representation (genotype to phe-
notype mapping) and the search algorithm employed. Al-
though the phrase “evolvable representation” is commonly
used in EC literature, representations generally only have a
capacity to become evolvable: evolvability emerges over the
course of evolution with a speciﬁc ﬁtness function, and is
deﬁned within the terms of that function. Therefore, in this
paper the term latent evolvability will be used to describe the
representation’s underlying capacity for becoming evolvable,
and acquired evolvability will be used to refer to its evolvabil-
ity learned in response to a particular ﬁtness function. The
test deﬁned in this paper will measure acquired evolvability,
and use that as a proxy for latent evolvability.

The general concept of evolvability applies to both natural
evolution and in artiﬁcial evolution; however latent evolv-
ability is not important in nature: sudden shifts in the en-
vironment factors occur, but the genome is not restarted
with a random conﬁguration with no acquired evolvability.
Also in nature, evolvability can be selected for directly, since
more evolvable representations are better able to survive in
the long-term (the environment is not static); genomes that
are able to react to changing environments quickly (i.e. have
high acquired evolvability) are more likely to survive. How-
ever, in artiﬁcial evolution, less selection pressure exists to
generate “evolvable” phenotypes because a single “perfect”
phenotype usually exists: outside of coevolution or incre-
mental evolution [7], the ﬁtness function is generally not
adaptive. If the ﬁtness function is static, there is little need
for evolvability, since any solution with high ﬁtness, even
one with low evolvability, is likely to survive. Thus if a
representation will be ultimately used in a domain with a
static ﬁtness function, it is more important to increase latent
evolvability, since no evolvability will be acquired during
evolution. Determining how to measure latent evolvability,
and what representations exhibit a high latent evolvability
will be a theme for future work.

From studies of biological organisms it is clear that many

factors aﬀect evolvability, including:

• modularity: the organization of genotypic and pheno-

typic features into reusable components [11, 13].

• duplication and divergence: structure A is duplicated
yielding structure B, then B is free to change function
without resulting in a loss of A [13].

• canalization: organizing the eﬀects of mutations such
that some features become more resistant to change
[19, 20].

• developmental constraints: constraining phenotypic vari-
ation against the appearance of less ﬁt individuals [12].

• hidden genetic variation: the developmental system
builds up phenotype-neutral mutations that can be ex-
pressed en masse with a certain selection pressure [9].

Whether or not these factors are products of selection for
evolvability or necessary preconditions for it is not yet well
understood. However, even simple developmental encodings
such as GRNs and RNA folding can exhibit these features
(see [2] for generic canalization in GRNs, and [6] for a gen-
eral overview in the RNA folding case). Thus the contribu-
tion to evolvability of these factors can be measured without
modeling a full developmental system.

3. MEASURING EVOLVABILITY

One way to measure evolvability in artiﬁcial evolution is
to compare the performance of several representations on
a standard benchmark test. However, such a test would
confuse the eﬀects of the representations’ latent evolvabil-
ity and their performance on the given task. Such a test
is ﬁne comparing the eﬀectiveness as an optimization algo-
rithm, but does not give an accurate measure of the relative
evolvability of each representation.

Instead, acquired evolvability can be empirically measured
as the representation’s ability to retain and generalize infor-
mation learned about a changing domain. Speciﬁcally, by
varying the amount of information provided during a train-
ing period (i.e. training on an adaptive ﬁtness function) and
measuring the resulting change in eﬃciency during a test
phase, evolvability can be determined. If the representation
exhibits a large diﬀerence in eﬃciency between cases where
little information is provided, and cases where information
about the underlying problem is plentiful, then the repre-
sentation can be said to have acquired evolvability for the
domain. Conversely, no change would indicate that the rep-
resentation does not make use of the information provided.
This test separates evolvability from benchmark perfor-
mance and furthermore from the eﬀects of genetic variance
(by comparing only trained populations). Separating perfor-
mance and genetic variance is necessary because direct en-
codings can perform well on some tasks, even on re-evolution,
although they exhibit no evolvability. In other words, this
separation allows systematic study of what is good for evolu-
tion in the long-term (evolvability), instead of the short-term
(ﬁnding the optimal solution).

Since acquired evolvability is being measured in a manner
uncoupled from the performance on a particular benchmark,
it is important to ask what it means to have high evolv-
ability, but to perform relatively poorly at a certain task?
Certainly if the representation were poor for many tasks, it
might not be particularly useful in general. However, repre-
sentations with high evolvability should perform better, on
average, on problems with adaptive ﬁtness functions, such
as those found in coevolution or incremental evolution, since
adaptability is more directly rewarded. Ultimately, the goal
of this line of work is to develop an encoding that has both
high evolvability and is eﬃcient in solving many tasks, but
since performance is the best understood of the two goals,

Figure 1: Calculating speciﬁc symmetry. The ﬁt-
ness function is composed of the target function
concatenated with its mirror image (in order to en-
sure bilateral symmetry). The candidate solution is
rewarded for characters matching the ﬁtness func-
tion, but only when the character that is bilaterally-
symmetric also matches.

this paper emphasizes the eﬀort to raise evolvability, as op-
posed to pure benchmark performance.

The domain used to demonstrate the test procedure is bi-
nary string symmetry. A distinction must be made between
learning general symmetry of any target string that is sym-
metric about the midpoint, and speciﬁc symmetry where
one half of the target string is deﬁned explicitly, and this
half is mirrored in order to complete the full target string.
This distinction is important because the degree to which
the representation learns general symmetry from instances
of speciﬁc symmetry is taken as the measure for acquired
evolvability. Fitness is calculated as the number of charac-
ters in the phenotype that match both the target function
and the character that is bilaterally-symmetric (ﬁgure 1).
Phenotypic characters that only match the target function
do not count towards ﬁtness, so that only matching symme-
tries are rewarded.

This domain was chosen for two reasons: ﬁrst, the ﬁt-
ness calculation is computationally simple to perform, and
second, there is a clear underlying structure to the prob-
lem that does not change, even if the target is changed (i.e.
target-independent bilateral symmetry). Thus, if the repre-
sentation is capable, there is an opportunity for exploiting
this invariance (general bilateral symmetry) in order to be-
come more evolvable, and furthermore, no other opportuni-
ties exist to do so.

By varying how quickly the speciﬁc instances of bilateral
symmetry change (the target drift rate), training sessions
can be constructed that provide variable amounts of infor-
mation about general symmetry. For example, a representa-
tion trained on only a single instance of bilateral symmetry
has no pressure to exploit general symmetry as a survival
strategy. Therefore the representation might not exhibit ac-
quired evolvability, even though it has the capacity for it.
Conversely, if the target function is changed slowly, then
there is a pressure for such learning. Since the optimal level
of change for a given representation is not known ahead of
time, several trials are run with the target drift rate varied
between 0.0 to 0.5 (0-50% change per generation), i.e. rang-
ing from static evaluation to evaluation on random noise.
The idea that an adaptive target function may facilitate
evolvability is due to Lipson et. al. [11].

After the initial training period, the target function is
completely randomized (maintaining bilateral symmetry),
and the eﬃciency is measured by running for 100 genera-
tions and then averaging the best ﬁtness of each trial at ev-
ery epoch. This procedure ensures that the result is based

• For each value of the target drift rate:

– Evolve for a ﬁxed number of genera-
tions (150), randomly changing the tar-
get after each generation.

– Reset to a new target function.

– Evolve without changing the target
function for a ﬁxed number of gener-
ations (100).

– Calculate the eﬃciency for this trial as
the average of the best ﬁtness individ-
ual over the last 100 generations.

• Calculate the acquired evolvability as the
variance of eﬃciency over all drift rates.

Figure 2: Summary of the method employed to mea-
sure acquired evolvability.

not only on the quality of the ﬁnal solution reached, but
also on how long it took the population to produce that so-
lution. The number of training generations is set at 150,
during which time the target function is allowed to change.
In this paper, target drift rates ranging from 0 to 0.5 are
tested in a total of nine trials: 0.0, 0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.15, 0.2,
0.3, 0.4, and 0.5, in order to cover a full range of high- and
low-information cases. See ﬁgure 2 for a summary.

Finally, acquired evolvability can be identiﬁed qualita-
tively from the shape of the average eﬃciency vs. target
drift rate curve. The more pronounced the “bell-curve”
shape, the higher the evolvability, since there is a signiﬁ-
cant diﬀerence between the trials where information about
general symmetry is provided (i.e. 1% - 10% drift), and trials
where little or no information is provided (i.e. 0% drift, and
50% drift). Conversely, a ﬂat line represents no evolvability,
since both high-information and low-information cases pro-
vide the same result. The “tails” of the bell-curve are ﬁxed
at 0% (no information due to an unchanging ﬁtness func-
tion) and 50% (no information due to the ﬁtness function
changing too quickly). However, the location of the “peak”
of the bell-curve depends on the representation, although in
all three representations tested in this paper, the peak fell
between 1% and 10% target drift. That the representation
should be able to extract the most information from this case
can be understood intuitively: the target is changing slowly
enough for the population to adapt when it drifts, but fast
enough to keep the population from converging on a speciﬁc
target, providing information about general symmetry.

Based on this qualitative analysis, acquired evolvability
can be quantiﬁed as the variance of eﬃciency over all trials,

E =

X

t

(Xt − µ)2/N (t),

where Xt is the eﬃciency of trial t, µ is the average over
all the trials, and N (t) is the number of trials. High vari-
ance corresponds to a steeper bell-curve and higher evolv-
ability. Conversely, low variance corresponds to a ﬂat-line,
or no diﬀerence in performance between low-information and
high-information cases, thus little evolvability. By using this
metric, representations can be assigned a numerical score for
acquired evolvability and thus ranked empirically.

Fitness:Target:Fitness Function:Candidate:Figure 3: The modiﬁed direct genetic representa-
tion. Each gene consists of a phenotypic trait (P),
and a linkage (L) and variance (V) parameter. In
this example the ﬁrst two traits are linked very
strongly and the second two traits are linked weakly.
The addition of the linkage and variance parameters
allows the genotype to encode information about
general symmetry.

4. CANDIDATE ENCODINGS

Three encodings are tested using this method (for param-

eters see appendix):

1. A direct-encoding, where the genotype and phenotype

are the same, represented by a binary string.

2. A modiﬁed direct encoding, containing secondary pa-
rameters aﬀecting how mutations should occur for each
character, and at what rate.

3. An encoding based on genetic regulatory networks,
where the phenotype is read as the network state after
a set number of iterations.

These three encodings were chosen to cover as broad a
range as possible, and in particular the modiﬁed direct en-
coding is the simplest possible representation able to learn
the underlying dynamics of the problem. It also serves as a
basis for controlled testing of features found in natural devel-
opmental systems (e.g. developmental variation and modu-
larity). By distinguishing these encodings, the proposed test
is shown to produce useful insights for future research.

4.1 Direct

The direct encoding tested in this paper consists of a bi-
nary string representing both the genotype and phenotype.
Standard point mutation (bit ﬂip) and one-point crossover
are employed, and each phenotypic character has the same
chance of being mutated. This encoding serves as a base-
line to calibrate the test for evolvability. Any evolvability
it exhibits must be strictly due to genetic variance inherent
in the population, since the only other modiﬁable parame-
ters are the phenotypic characters undergoing evolution. In
other words, since the genotype is not extensible, there is no
space to store information learned about the ﬁtness function
in general; only speciﬁc instances can be stored.

4.2 Modiﬁed Direct

The modiﬁed direct encoding is similar to the direct en-
coding, with the exception that each phenotypic trait also
has a linkage and developmental variance parameter (ﬁgure
3). The same evolutionary operators are used.

The linkage parameter is a value from 0 to 1 which de-
scribes how single mutations aﬀect multiple traits. If two
traits have very similar linkage parameters, then they will
most likely be mutated together (to the same value). The
function used to determine this probability is

E(‘1, ‘2) = e−T ∗(‘1−‘2)2

,

(1)

where T is the tolerance parameter controlling what linkage
distances are eﬀective, and ‘1 and ‘2 are the two linkage
parameters being compared. This function is a Gaussian
distribution with a maximum of 1.0 occurring when ‘1 = ‘2,
i.e. when the two linkage parameters are equal.

The linkage parameter allows the genetic representation
to store knowledge it has gained of the ﬁtness function in
a way that does not necessarily directly aﬀect ﬁtness. This
type of parameter is known as a neutral trait [16], and can be
considered a form of strategy parameter, commonly found in
Evolutionary Strategies (ES) literature[15]. This neutrality
is non-trivial, however, since although the linkage param-
eters only aﬀect how future mutations are structured, the
eﬀects of a linkage mutation will manifest over time as a
ﬁtness change. In the case of learning speciﬁc symmetry, an
optimal linkage pattern exists linking each phenotypic trait
on the string to the corresponding trait on the second half
that is bilaterally symmetry (i.e. general symmetry).

The developmental variance parameter describes the trait’s
propensity to be mis-expressed during ﬁtness evaluation.
Each phenotypic trait has a probability of being mutated
(ﬂipped) during development with a probability equal to
the variance parameter. Combining developmental variance
with multiple evaluations of a single genotype yields an av-
erage of the local search space around the solution, biased
by the linkage parameters. That is, if the linkage is bilater-
ally symmetric, then only bilaterally symmetric variants will
be included in the average. Tying linkage directly to ﬁtness
is important for rewarding solutions that have learned the
“correct” parameter linkage for the target problem.

Two versions of the modiﬁed direct encoding were tested,
one with developmental variance taking place as described
above (the standard implementation), and a second with the
eﬀects of developmental variance randomized. Thus the ef-
fects both parameters have on evolvability can be measured
independently; linkage by comparing the second version to
direct, and variance by comparing both modiﬁed encodings.

4.3 Genetic Regulatory Network

The third encoding tested in this paper is based on a
simple model of the processes inherent to genetic regulatory
networks (GRNs), particularly those found in eukaryotes.
GRN encodings are often used in EC research because they
are considered to have high evolvability, which makes them
a particularly interesting encoding to test.

4.3.1 GRN Encodings

Recent studies in EC highlight the use of GRN encodings,
for example, the work of Eggenberger [5] and Bongard [3],
as well as in theoretical biology, for example in the work of
Hogeweg [10]. These methods are all multicellular, where
the GRN state evolution over time describes cell division
and diﬀerentiation. Since complex morphologies consisting
of many cells can be computationally intensive to model,
the implementation tested in this paper is limited to a single
GRN, which corresponds to single-celled eukaryotes, such as
yeast.

Despite the relative simplicity of single GRN models, they
have several features which make them important for study-
ing evolvability. First, GRNs are capable of organizing as
scale-free networks, i.e. a mix between random and hier-
archical organizations [1]. Scale-free networks exhibit many
properties that are important for evolvability, such as modu-

VPLVPLVPLFigure 4: The GRN genetic representation. Each
gene has a cis region and a transcription region, as
well as an innovation number (not depicted). The
GRN speciﬁed by this genome is shown in ﬁgure 5.

Figure 5: The resulting network from the genome
shown in ﬁgure 4. Arrows represent promotion, and
the ﬂat connection between product 1 and 2 is in-
hibitory. A and B are environmental tfs, i.e. they
determine the state of the phenotype but do not
perform any regulatory function like 1 and 2. GRN
representations are able to represent complex net-
works of interactions compactly.

larity and robustness against failure due to single mutations.
Second, GRNs inherently support the “duplication and di-
vergence” scheme whereby a gene is ﬁrst duplicated, and the
copy then begins to develop some new function, and slowly
diverges from the original [22]. This phenomenon allows
new function to develop while still preserving the old regu-
latory structures. Duplication and divergence is implicated
as a source of modularity, which is necessary for evolvability
[14]. Finally, complex network models in general have been
shown to exhibit canalization [2].
4.3.2 Implementation

In this paper, a GRN consists of a concentration of tran-
scription factors (tfs) in some arbitrary substrate, and a set
of fuzzy if-then rules for reading the current state and al-
tering the production of one or more tfs. These rules are
encoded directly into the genome itself. A single gene con-
sists of a cis-regulatory (cis) region paired with a list of
transcription factors (ﬁgure 4). The cis region contains the
precondition for producing the proteins speciﬁed in the tf
list. It is composed of promoter sites, which facilitate pro-
tein transcription, and inhibitor binding sites, which inhibit
production. Proteins in the environment bind to these sites
and aﬀect the production of the tfs speciﬁed in the tf list.
The transcription factors produced can either be environ-
mental or regulatory. Environmental tfs correspond to the
“outputs” of the GRN (and thus have a set number, one
per phenotypic character). At each time-step during the
simulation their concentrations are read and stored as en-
tries in the output vector. The regulatory tfs bind back to
the cis region to determine the current state of the network.
New regulatory tfs can arise through mutation, however the
number of environmental tfs is ﬁxed.

A key feature of biological GRNs is the degree to which
promoter binding is “fuzzy.” That is, an entire family of
similar proteins are capable of binding to a speciﬁc promoter
site, allowing complex GRNs to form with a compact spec-

• Set all tf concentrations to a random value

between 0 and 1, initially.

• Set all production rates to 0.0, initially.

• For a ﬁxed number of steps:

– For each gene, calculate the production
rate based on the concentrations of the
proteins binding at each promoter and
inhibitor site (eqn. 2).

– For each tf in each gene, increase or de-
crease that tf’s concentration based on
the production rate (eqn. 3). Clamp
the concentration [0, 1].

– Decay the tf concentrations by a con-

stant factor.

• Record the absolute concentrations of the

environmental tfs.

Figure 6: GRN activation method.

iﬁcation. This fuzziness is captured in the artiﬁcial GRN
encoding as binding eﬃcacy, which depends on how com-
patible the two proteins are.

Initially the environment contains a set concentration of
tfs (random). When a tf in the environment matches (within
some tolerance level based on the binding eﬃcacy) either
a promoter or an inhibitor region, it binds to that region
and aﬀects the production rate of the transcription factors
encoded in that gene (ﬁgure 5). The production rate is
calculated in two steps. First, the promoter eﬃcacy of a
single gene is calculated by
X

X

sign(c) ∗ concentration(v) ∗ E(c, v),

P (G) =

(2)

c∈C

v∈V

where C is the set of all binding sites in the cis region of gene
G, V is the set of all regulatory tfs in the environment, and
E is the binding eﬃcacy, given in equation 1. Then the tfs
speciﬁed by that gene are added to the environment, with
concentrations given by

∆concentration(v) = P (G)/length(C).

(3)

The newly produced proteins are added to the existing en-
vironmental concentrations. This cycle continues for a pre-
deﬁned number of iterations, at the end of which the envi-
ronmental tfs are arranged in order and the phenotype is
read as the concentrations thresholded {0, 1} (ﬁgure 6).

The GRN encoding uses the NeuroEvolution of Augment-
ing Topologies (NEAT) method for performing crossover on
variable length genomes [18]. Initially each genome contains
40 genes (one for each environmental tf), but new genes can
arise through mutation. Each gene consists of a cis region,
transcription region, and a unique innovation number. In-
novation numbers record when new regulatory structure, i.e.
a new character in a cis or regulatory region, or a new gene,
is introduced to a genome. During crossover, the innovation
numbers are lined up so that similar coding regions can be
crossed over correctly, regardless of the amount of genotypic
complexiﬁcation (i.e. artiﬁcial synapsis is performed).

4.3.3 Variants

In addition to the standard implementation, three vari-

ants of the GRN encoding are compared:

A1Bcistranscription−12122AB11. A variant with the tolerance parameter set to one half
of the baseline value. The tolerance parameter controls
how similar a tf must be to a promoter/inhibitor site in
order to bind to it. A decrease in tolerance means more
proteins are compatible with more sites, and thus the
overall network connectivity increases. If the tolerance
value is set too low the network will become noisy and
unable to perform meaningful computation. On the
other hand if the tolerance value is set too high, then
few interactions will take place.

2. A variant with initially two regulators in each cis re-
gion instead of one. Increasing the size of the cis re-
gion has a similar eﬀect to decreasing the tolerance
(increase connectivity), however since the cis region
is under genetic control, the connectivity can be ﬁne
tuned. The main cost is a two-fold increase in the
initial genome size, which may make search ineﬃcient.

3. A variant with non-random initial tf state. The base-
line GRN has a randomized initial tf state, in order
to encourage the GRN function to become robust (i.e.
applicable to many environments). The non-random
version does not select for this robustness, and there-
fore may exploit the initial tf state to encode its phe-
notype. Testing this variant will help determine the
extent to which reliance on epigenetic factors (e.g. ini-
tial tf state) may aﬀect evolvability.

Comparing the evolvability of the four GRN variants will
help determine what factors aﬀect the GRN’s ability to ex-
tract and exploit information about the target problem.

5. RESULTS

Each encoding along with several parameter variants were
tested with target drift rate values of 0.0, 0.01, 0.05, 0.1,
0.15, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, and 0.5. Though the optimal drift rate
may diﬀer from encoding to encoding, this range should be
suﬃcient to capture the full range of learning response. For
each target drift rate setting, the encoding was tested 40
times, to insure a useful average. An overview of the ac-
quired evolvability scores is given in ﬁgure 7. All tests for
statistical signiﬁcance were done using the standard Analy-
sis of Variance (ANOVA) method, which gives the probabil-
ity that any pairing of two means is statistically signiﬁcant.
The direct encoding performs better during the test phase
than either of the other two representations (an average ef-
ﬁciency of about 91%; ﬁgures 8, 9, and 11), but exhibits lit-
tle eﬃciency variance, less than 0.00001697 (ﬁgure 7). The
means contributing to this variance are not statistically sig-
niﬁcant (P = 0.59), thus indicating that there is no acquired
evolvability. Since there is no genetic capacity for the direct
representation to record information about the domain, any
level of variance must be due to sampling bias or the pop-
ulation’s genetic variance. In general, representations that
do not show statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences in eﬃciency
have acquired no evolvability during the test, and thus may
have little or no latent evolvability.

Two versions of the modiﬁed direct encoding were tested:
the standard implementation (modiﬁed), and a variant with
random developmental variance (modiﬁed-random), as dis-
cussed in discussed in Section 4.2. The variant exhibits no
evolvability (variance is not statistically signiﬁcant, P =
0.56), similar to the direct encoding (ﬁgure 7). However,

Figure 7: Overall comparison of all encodings and
parameter variants by acquired evolvability. The
light-gray colored bars represent GRN-based vari-
ants, the dark-gray bars represent modiﬁed direct
variants, and the black bar is the baseline direct-
encoding. “grn” refers to the baseline GRN imple-
mentation, “grn-lowertol” to a GRN variant with
the tolerance parameter halved, “grn-longercis” to
a GRN variant with the initial cis region length dou-
bled, “grn-nonrandom” to a variant with all initial
tf levels set to 1.0. “Modiﬁed” refers to the modiﬁed
direct baseline, “modiﬁed-random” to the modiﬁed
direct implementation with random developmental
variance, and “direct” to the direct encoding. The
GRN encoding is the most evolvable, and the evolv-
ability of the modiﬁed encoding depends heavily on
the form of the developmental variance.

the baseline implementation exhibited more than 14 times
the evolvability of the direct encoding (variance is statisti-
cally signiﬁcant, P < 0.0001), though performing on aver-
age more than 10% worse (ﬁgure 8). This result indicates
that developmental variance plays a large role in determin-
ing evolvability, and in particular that this variance must
be meaningful with respect to the target ﬁtness function,
otherwise there is no evolvability increase.

Four parameter variants of the GRN encoding were tested:
the standard implementation (grn), from section 4.3, an im-
plementation with the tolerance parameter set to one-half
of the baseline value (lowertol), an implementation with
initially two promoters in each cis region, instead of one
(longercis), and an implementation with non-random initial
tf state and all tfs initialized to 1.0 (nonrandom). Evolvabil-
ity is summarized in ﬁgure 7 and eﬃciency vs. target drift in
ﬁgure 9. With an acquired evolvability of 0.000558 (statis-
tically signiﬁcant, P < 0.0001), the baseline GRN encoding
is almost 33 times more evolvable than the direct encod-
ing. The lower tolerance parameter variant performs slightly
worse than the baseline GRN, and the other two variants
(longer cis, and nonrandom initialization) both exhibit less
evolvability than the modiﬁed direct encoding. The latter
two variants exhibit eﬃciency variance that is not statis-
tically signiﬁcant (and therefore no acquired evolvability),
though only by a small margin (P = 0.52). The absolute
performance of the GRN encoding is similar on average to
the modiﬁed direct encoding, on average 5-10% worse than
the direct encoding.

02·10−44·10−46·10−4Evolvability(σ2)directmodiﬁed-randomgrn-nonrandomgrn-longercismodiﬁedgrn-lowertolgrnFigure 8: Comparison of two modiﬁed direct vari-
ants for eﬃciency. Refer to ﬁgure 7 for variant
descriptions. The direct encoding and modiﬁed-
random show little variance, while the modiﬁed di-
rect baseline encoding has distinct dips towards the
low-information target drift settings (0.0 and 0.5).
This is consistent with the “bell-curve” shape.

Figure 9: Comparison of the GRN variants for ef-
ﬁciency. Refer to ﬁgure 7 for variant descriptions.
The direct encoding performs better on average at
each target drift setting, but exhibits no variance in
performance, unlike the GRN encodings.

Figure 10: Comparison of the eﬀects of training on
the acquired evolvability of GRN representations.
A training period length of 300 generations (grn-
longer) leads to an eﬀective tripling of evolvability.

Figure 11: Comparison of the training period length
GRN variants for eﬃciency. Refer to ﬁgure 7 for
variant descriptions. The “grn-longer” plot refers
to a GRN variant where the training period is 300
generations, and exhibits high eﬃciency variance.

Finally, the standard GRN implementation was run with
a training period of 300 generations, instead of 150. This
change resulted in nearly a 3-fold increase in the acquired
evolvability (statistically signiﬁcant, P < 0.0001), an eﬀec-
tive 91-fold increase over the direct implementation (ﬁgure
10 for evolvability comparison, ﬁgure 11 for eﬃciencies).
This result indicates that the length of training may play
an important role in determining acquired evolvability.

6. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK

Changing the ﬁtness function over time (adaptive ﬁtness
function) plays an important role in evolution because a
static ﬁtness function does not provide any pressure to se-
lect for evolvability. Therefore, even if a representation is
highly evolvable, there may be no pressure to become evolv-
able in many domains. This insight is important because it
may help explain the tendency to see many “brittle” evolved
solutions, and in general low evolvability in artiﬁcial evolu-
tion, even with developmental systems.

The results highlight several questions about evolvability:

• Can evolvability be used to counteract the eﬀects of
convergence? For example, although the GRN encod-
ing has high acquired evolvability, when comparing a
population that has been undergoing training for 150
generations to a randomly initialized population, the
random population seems to always be more eﬃcient
at solving the problem. The most likely explanation
is because the trained population has converged some-
what during evolution.

• How broadly can the measure proposed in this paper
be applied to other tasks? The test for evolvability
requires a ﬁtness function that can be changed over
time, in order to provide a variable amount of infor-
mation about some invariant properties. What kinds
of domains are amenable to such variation? One in-
teresting direction would be to use coevolution as an
adaptive benchmark, as it allows for theoretically un-
bounded increases in acquired evolvability.

• What factors inﬂuence acquired evolvability? For ex-
ample, why does the version of the modiﬁed direct
encoding with random developmental variance exhibit

0.70.750.80.850.90.951Eﬃciency00.10.20.30.40.5TargetDriftRatedirectmodiﬁed-randommodiﬁed0.70.750.80.850.90.951Eﬃciency00.10.20.30.40.5TargetDriftRatedirectgrnnonrandomlowertollongercis05·10−41·10−31.5·10−32·10−3Evolvability(σ2)directgrngrn-longer0.70.750.80.850.90.951Eﬃciency00.10.20.30.40.5TargetDriftRatedirectgrnlongerno acquired evolvability? Both versions are the same
genetically and thus have the same latent evolvability,
however only the standard version acquires evolvability
during training. The only diﬀerence is that “correct”
developmental variance allows the linkage parameter
to directly inﬂuence ﬁtness.

Finally, there are three points that need to be addressed
to improve the test procedure. First, work must be done to
explore the relationship between acquired and latent evolv-
ability. Is it suﬃcient just to repeat the test procedure on
several domains, and average acquired evolvability? Sec-
ond, a metric needs to be established to take into account
the eﬀect of training time on acquired evolvability. Does
evolvability saturate as training time increases? Some en-
codings may become evolvable more slowly than others, but
may have a greater capacity to do so. Each encoding should
be tested not only on a range of target drift rate settings,
but also on a range of training period lengths. Third, some
context must be imposed on the relative result scale. What
exactly does 33 times more evolvability mean, in practice?
Is it signiﬁcant, i.e., does it impact long-term evolution?

7. CONCLUSION

Since the direct representation exhibits no signiﬁcant vari-
ance in eﬃciency while the GRN and modiﬁed direct encod-
ings do, the test proposed in this paper correctly contrasts
relative acquired evolvability. Furthermore, this test eluci-
dates many factors that inﬂuence evolvability, including the
length of the training period, the genetic control of mutation
eﬀects (linkage parameter and GRN encoding), and the ini-
tial complexity of the representation (GRN initial cis region
length). Only acquired evolvability in the general symmetry
domain has been measured so far. In order to approximate
a representation’s latent evolvability, a broad range of test
problems must be employed.
In spite of this caveat, the
acquired evolvability test provides insight into evolvability,
and raises many interesting questions for future inquiry.

8. REFERENCES
[1] A.-L. Barab´asi and Z. N. Oltvai. Network biology:
Understanding the cell’s functional organization.
Nature Reviews Genetics, 5:101–113, 2004.

[2] A. Bergman and M. L. Siegal. Evolutionary

capacitance as a general feature of complex gene
networks. Nature, 424:549–552, 2003.

[3] J. C. Bongard. Evolving modular genetic regulatory
networks. In Proc. of CEC 2002, pages 1872–1877.
IEEE Press, 2002.

[4] M. Ebner, M. Shackleton, and R. Shipman. How

neutral networks inﬂuence evolvability. Complexity,
7(2):19–33, 2001.

[5] P. Eggenberger. Evolving morphologies of simulated

3d organisms based on diﬀerential gene expression.
Proc. of the 4th European Conf. on Artiﬁcial Life,
pages 205–213, 1997.

[6] W. Fontana. Modeling ‘evo-devo’ with rna. BioEssays,

24:1164–1177, 2002.

[7] F. Gomez and R. Miikkulainen. Incremental evolution

of complex general behavior. Adaptive Behavior,
5:317–342, 1997.

[8] T. F. Hansen. Is modularity necessary for evolvability?
remarks on the relationship between pleiotropy and

evolvability. BioSystems, 69:83–94, 2002.

[9] J. Hermisson and G. Wagner. The population genetic
theory of hidden variance and genetic robustness.
Genetics, 168:2271–2284, 2004.

[10] P. Hogeweg. Evolving mechanisms of morphogenesis:

On the interplay between diﬀerential adhesion and cell
diﬀerentiation. Jour. of Theo. Bio., 203:317–333, 2000.

[11] H. Lipson, J. Pollack, and N. Suh. On the origin of

modular variation. Evolution, 56(8):1549–1556, 2002.

[12] J. Maynard-Smith, R. Burian, S. Kauﬀman,

P. Alberch, J. Campbell, B. Goodwin, R. Lande,
D. Raup, and L. Wolpert. Developmental constraints
and evolution. The Quarterly Review of Biology,
60(3):265–287, 1985.

[13] R. A. Raﬀ. The Shape of Life: Genes, development,

and the Evolution of Animal Form. The University of
Chicago Press, 1996.

[14] R. A. Raﬀ and B. J. Sly. Modularity and dissociation
in the evolution of gene expression territories in
development. Evolution and Development,
2(2):102–113, 2000.

[15] I. Rechenberg. Evolutionsstrategie ’94. Friedrich

Frommann Verlag, 1994.

[16] J. Smith and T. Fogarty. Operator and parameter

adaption in genetic algorithms. Soft Computing,
1:81–87, 1997.

[17] B. M. R. Stadler, P. F. Stadler, G. Wagner, and

W. Fontana. The topology of the possible: Formal
spaces underlying patterns of evolutionary change.
Journal of Theoretical Biology, 213:241–274, 2001.

[18] K. O. Stanley and R. Miikkulainen. Evolving neural

networks through augmenting topologies. Evolutionary
Computation, 10(2):99–127, 2002.

[19] K. O. Stanley and R. Miikkulainen. A taxonomy for
artiﬁcial embryogeny. Artif. Life, 9(2):93–130, 2003.
[20] C. H. Waddington. Canalization of development and
the inheritance of acquired characters. Nature,
150:563, 1942.

[21] G. Wagner and L. Altenberg. Complex adaptations

and the evolution of evolvability. Evolution,
50(3):967–976, 1996.

[22] C.-H. Yuh and E. H. Davidson. Modular cis-regulatory

organization of endo16, a gut-speciﬁc gene of the sea
urchin embryo. Development, 122:1069–1082, 1996.

APPENDIX
For all algorithms, population size is 50 and target string
length is 40 bits. Selection is through a binary tournament.
All parameters are encoded as doubles or unsigned integers,
and crossover occurs only at gene boundaries.

Direct and modiﬁed direct have a 1% chance per gene per
generation of being mutated. Modiﬁed direct genomes are
evaluated 5 times with the ﬁtness averaged. The linkage
similarity tolerance is 150.

GRN ﬁxed parameters: 10% weight mutation (Gaussian,
variance = 1.0), 0.5% add new character, and 5% duplicate
gene rate. The GRN model iterates for 10 steps (ﬁxed),
each tf concentration is decayed 10% per step, and there
is no limit to the number of tfs. The tolerance parameter
is evolvable, initially 1500 (750 for lowertol). The initial
number of genes is 40 (each gene has a random promoter
and a ﬁxed environmental tf).

